T minus 10, 9, 8. We have a go for main engine start. We have main engine start, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0, lift off.

30 seconds and counting.

Astronauts report it feels good. T minus 25 seconds.

20 seconds and counting.

T minus 15 seconds, guidance is internal. 12, 11, 10, 9, ignition sequence starts. 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0. All engine running.
Lift off. We have a lift off. 32 minutes past the hour. Lift off on Apollo 11.

Roger, we got a roll program. Tower cleared. Roger.

All clear and we are now moving to the second stage of our engine program.

One Bravo.

Apollo 11, Houston, you are good at one minute.

Shut down right on time. We copy 101.4 by 103.6.

Roger, shut down, and we copy 101.4 by 103.6.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. You are confirmed go for orbit.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. You are go for TLI, over.

Apollo 11, thank you.

Roger, out.

Ignition.

We confirm ignition and the thrust is go.

Apollo 11, this is Houston at 1 minute. Trajectory and guidance look good and the stage is good, over.

Apollo 11, Roger.

35,000 feet per second.

Cut off.

Climb velocity 35,570 feet per second. Altitude 177 nautical miles.

Houston, Apollo 11, that burn gave us a magnificent ride.

Roger, 11. We'll pass that on and it certainly looks like you're well on your way now.

How's the air and how do you read the light?
Oh, loud and clear out Mike, and we understand that you are dark.
That's the moment.

Apollo 11, Houston, the depiction is pretty good on our monitor here, the colors not too varsity, at least on this set. Could you describe what you're looking at, over?

Roger, you're seeing Earth as we see it on our left hand window. It's a little more than a half Earth. We're looking at the Eastern Pacific Ocean, and the north half to the top half of the screen we can see North America, Alaska, United States, Canada, Mexico, and Central America.
South America becomes invisible just off, beyond the terminator or inside the shadow. You can see the oceans with a definite blue cast, see white bands of major cloud formations across the Earth, and can see coastlines that got the Western US, San Joaquin Valley, the Sierra mountain range, the peninsula of Baja California, and can see some cloud formations over Southeastern US.
There's one definite mile storm Southwest of Alaska, looks like about 500 to a thousand miles, and another very minor storm showing the south end of the screen near the along way south of the equator, probably 45 degrees or more south latitude.

You can pick out the grounds, the grounds in the landforms pretty well. The greens do not show up very well, some green showing along the Northeastern, Northwestern coast of the United States and Northwestern coast of Canada.

Roger.

There world, hold on to your head, I'm going to turn you upside down.

11 that's pretty good roll there.

Yeah, that was pretty sloppy, Charlie, let me try that one again. You'll never beat out the Thunderbird.

I'm acting my self seat safe, darling. I'll just put you back right side up where you blow.

Roger.

11 Houston, if you could comply, we'd like to see some smiling faces up there, if you could give us some interior views. I'm sure everybody'd like to see you over.

Okay, we'll reconfigure the TV for that.

Roger.

That's big Mike Collins. There you go, little better.

Yeah, hello there, both fans. You've got a little bit of me, plus Neil in the center couch, and Buzz is doing the camera work this time.

Roger.

Well, I put on a coat and tie, but I know about this ahead of time.

Is Buzz holding your Q cards for you, over?

Q cards have a no.

We have, we have no intention of competing with the professionals, believe me.

We are very comfortable up here, although we do have a happy home. There is plenty of room for the three of us and I think we're all learning to find our favorite little corner to sit in. There are a little bit very comfortable but after a while, you get to point where you sort of get tired of the rattling around and banging off the ceiling and the floor and the sides, so you tend to find a little corner somewhere and put your knees up or something like that to wedge yourself in and it seems more at home.

11, Houston, we're really amazed at the quality of the picture of the tunnel. It's really superb, over.

It is, we're doing a real nice job in there. Yeah, we're about to open the hatch now.

Roger.

Buzz Aldrin reporting that he's halfway into the LM. And this view is inside the LM cabin.

Hey, that's a great shot right there. We see you in there. Yeah, that's Neil and Mike.

Better be, anyway.

Can see you waving.

Buzz Aldrin has apparently carried the camera into the LM with him showing us Neil Armstrong and Mike Collins back in the CSM.

Apollo 11, this is Houston, over.

Apollo 11, this is Houston, over.

Roger, go ahead Houston, Apollo 11.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. You are a go for LOI, over.

Roger, go for LOI.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. All your systems are looking good, going around the corner. We'll see you on the other side, over.

Roger.

Everything looks okay up here.

Roger, out.

And we've had loss of signal as Apollo 11 goes behind the Moon.

Madrid AOS, Madrid AOS.

Ready and clear, Houston, how was that?

Roger, reading you the same now. Could you repeat your burn status report? We copied the residuals and burn time and that was about it. Send the whole thing again, please.

It was right, it was right perfect. Delta V 60, burn time 557. And use some angle. BJX-.1, BGY-.1, BGZ+.1. No trim. Minus 6.8 on Delta VC. Fuel was 38.8, oxidizer 39.0. Plus 50 unbalance, and we ran an increase on the perks. Now 44. Showed us in a 60.9 by 169.9.

Roger, we copy your burn status report.

We're getting a beautiful picture in down here now, 11, the color's filling in quite clearly and we can see the horizon and the the relative blackness of space and without getting into the question of grays and browns, it looks, at least on our monitor, sort of a brownish gray.

It's a It is the way way describing it in a sense to me, as though it made a difference just sitting back in the tunnel and gazing at all windows. It makes a difference which one you're looking out of. For example, the camera right now is looking out the number five window and it definitely gives a rosier or tanner tinge, especially when you look straight through it and not at an angle.

Roger.

Yeah, the crater that's in the center of the screen now is Webb. We'd be looking straight down on it at about 6 minutes before our descent. It has a relatively flat bottom to the crater and you can see maybe two or three craters that are in the bottom of it on the Western wall, the wall that's now nearest to the camera, near the bottom of the screen, we can see a a dimpled crater just on the outside. And then coming back towards the bottom of the screen and to the left, you can see a a series of depressions. Uh it's this type of connected craters that give us most uh to discover why they're in the particular pattern that they're in. I'll zoom the camera in now and try and give you a little closer look at this.

Roger, we're observing the Temple crater now, the central peak that we can see on the orbiter photos, doesn't seem to stand out very well here.

Well, they're not central peaks, they're depressions in the center.

Roger.

Roger, Eagle has landed.

Roger, how does it look?
Eagle has landed.

Roger.
It's looking good.

Roger, Neil, we got a, if you give us fuel data, we got the load for you.

We are now coming up on 30 seconds to acquisition of the command module.

We'll stand by for that event.

Columbia, Houston, over.

Houston, Columbia, read you loud and clear, how me?
Watch five by, Mike. How did it go?

Everything is going just swimmingly, beautiful.

Great. We're standing by for Eagle.

Okay, he's on the wrong.

We copy that.

Houston, how do you read?
Five by, Eagle, we are standing by for your burn report, over.

Roger, the burn was on time.

The residuals before nulling, minus .1, minus .4, minus .1, X and Z null to zero.

Eagle, Houston, we read you to go for PDI, over.

Roger, understand.

Right on.

1, 0.
15, 10%.

Two, that's 20 seconds, everything looking good. We show altitude about 47,000 ft.

Good radar data, altitude now 33,500 ft.

We're still go, altitude 27,000 ft.

Same alarm and it appears to come up when we have a 1668 up.

Roger, copy.

Eagle, Houston, we'll monitor your Delta.

Delta is looking good now.

Roger, Delta H is looking good to us.

We are on time.

Roger, copy. Throttled down.

Get it in the simulator.

Roger.

Thinks things look real close.

Altitude now 21,000 ft, still looking very good.

Velocity down now to 1,200 ft per second. You're looking great to us, Eagle.

Okay, I'm still on blue, so we may tend to lose as we gradually pitch over. Let me try auto again now, see what happens.
Roger.

Okay, it looks like it's holding.
Roger, we got good data.

We're go, same time, we're go.

2,000 ft, 2,000 ft into the egg, 47 degrees.
Roger.

37 degrees.

Eagle, looking great, your go.

Altitude 1,600.

1,400 ft, still looking very good.

Roger 1202, we copy it.

35 degrees.

35 degrees, 750, coming down to 23.

700 ft, 21 down, 33 degrees.

300 ft, down to 19.

540 ft down to 30 and a 15.

At 400 ft down at 9.

Gate forward.

350 ft down at 4, 30, and a half down.

You're uh paid done with on velocity.

100 ft down three and a half, 47 forward.
What up?
On 100 on half down.

70.

At this not there.

50 down to two and a half, 19 forward.

Altitude, velocity light, and a half down 220 ft.

13 forward, forward coming down nicely 200 ft, 4 and 1/2 down, 5 and 1/2 down.

Within 60, 6 and 1/2 down, 5 and 1/2 down.

9 forward.

It's good.

120 ft.

100 ft, 3 and 1/2 down, 9 forward.
5 percent.

105.

At 75 ft, guys looking good, down a half.
6 forward.

60 seconds.

Light's on.

Down two and a half.

Forward.
Forward.

40 ft, down two and a half, looking up from that.
30 ft, two and a half down, right shadow.

4 forward.
4 forward, drift to the right, a little.
Ready down a half.

30 seconds, forward this.

Contact light.

Okay, engine stop, ACA at a descent.
Old control boat auto descengine command override off.

Engine arm off.

413 is in.

We copy you down, Eagle.

System, uh tranquility base here, the Eagle has landed.
Roger, tranquillity, we copy you on the ground, you got a bunch of guys about to turn blue, we're breathing again, thanks a lot.

Thank you.

You're looking good here.

Okay, we're going to be busy for a minute.

After arm on, take care of the
I'll get to
Okay, we look like we're vending the ox right now.
Roger Eagle, and you are stay for T1, over. Eagle, you are stay for T1.

Roger.
And we stay for T1.
Roger, we see you venting the ox.

Neil Armstrong reporting there, no difficulty adapting to the 16th gravity of the moon.
Brenda is a relatively level plain, cratered with a, a fairly large number of, craters of the, of the five to 50 ft variety, and some ridges, uh, small 20, 30 ft high, I would guess, and uh, literally thousands of little one and two ft craters around the area, we see some uh, angular blocks out uh, several 100 ft in front of us, that are probably uh, two ft in size, and have uh, angular edges.
Uh, there is a hill in view, uh, just about uh, on the ground track, uh, ahead of us, difficult to estimate, but might be a, a half a mile, or uh, a mile.
Roger Tranquility, we copy over.

You said the mesa came down, all right.
Houston, Roger, we copy and we're standing by for your TED.

Houston, uh, this is Neil radio check.
Neil, this is Houston, loud and clear, break break buzz, this is Houston, radio check and verify TV circuit breaker and.
Roger, TV circuit breaker is in.

And we are getting a picture on the TV.

And you had a good picture on?
Uh, there's a great deal of contrast in it, and it's currently upside down on our monitor, but we can make out uh, fair amount of detail.

Okay, but you verify the position uh, the opening I got to have on the camera.

Damn, what?

Okay, Neil, we can see you coming down the ladder now.

Okay, I just checked to get back up to that first step.
So, it's uh, not even collapse too far, but uh, it's adequate to get back up.

Roger, we copy, that's a pretty good little jump.

The buzz, this is Houston, F2 116th for a second for shadow photography on the sequence camera.

Okay.

Um uh, at the foot of the ladder, the lamp foot pads are only uh uh, depressed in the surface about uh one or two inches, although the surface appears to be, uh, very very fine grained, as you get close to it. It's almost like a powder, round mass, it is very fine.
Now, I'm going to step off the land now.

That's one small step for man.

One giant leap for man.
The surface is fine and powdery. I can I can kick it up loosely with my toe.

It does adhere in fine layers like powdered charcoal, to the, to the sole and inside of my boot.
I'm sure not to lock it on my way home.
Particularly good thoughts.

That's our home for the next couple hours, we want to take good care of it.
Okay, I'm on the top step, and I can look down over the RCU and and the gear pad.

It's a very simple matter to hop down from one step to the next.

Yes, that thought could be very comfortable, and, and walking is also very comfortable.
That you're on, you've got three more steps, and then a long one.
I think I'll leave that one foot up there and hands down about the fourth rung up.
There you go.
And I think I'll do the same.
One more. About another inch.
Hey, you got it.
That's a good step. Yeah.
Not a three-footer.

Beautiful view.
Did that something?
Magnova from flight down here.
Make this and desolation.

But there is still, we haven't read the plaque, we'll read the plaque that's on the front landing gear of this limb.
First there's two hemispheres, one showing.

It's of the two hemispheres of the Earth.
Underneath it says,
"Here men from the planet Earth first set foot upon the moon, July 1969 AD."
It came in peace for all mankind.
It has the the crew members' signatures and the signature of the President of the United States.

Tranquility Base, this is Houston. Could we get both of you on the camera for a minute, please?
Tranquility Base, this is Houston. Could we get both of you on the camera for a minute, please?

Roger, you'd like to get both of you on the field of view of the camera, please.

Neil and Buzz, the President of the United States is in his office now, and we'd like to say a few words to you, over.

Would be an honor.

Go ahead, Mr. President. This is Houston, over.

Hello, Neil and Buzz. I'm talking to you by telephone from the Oval Room of the White House, and this certainly has to be the most historic telephone call ever made.

I just can't tell you how proud we all are of what you. For every American, this has to be the proudest day of our lives, and for people all over the world, I am sure they too join with us in recognizing what an immense feat this is.

Because of what you have done, the heavens have become a part of man's world. And as you talk to us from the sea of tranquility, it inspires us to redouble our efforts to bring peace and tranquility to Earth.

For one priceless moment, in the whole history of man, all the people on this Earth are truly one, one in their pride in what you have done, and one in our prayers that you will return safely to Earth.

Thank you, Mr. President. It's a great honor and privilege for us to be here representing not only the United States but and of peace of all nations and with interest and curiosity and and with a vision for the future. An honor for us to be able to participate here today.

And thank you very much and I look forward, all of us look forward to seeing you on the Hornet on Thursday.

Look forward to that very much, sir.

I bump and now? Now you're clear, you're rubbing up against me a little bit. Okay? All right, that's right. That's the left.
Okay.
Pull the switch and I'll get the hatch.
Okay.

The hatch is closed and latched and verified secure.

Tranquility Base, uh Houston.
Roger, go ahead.
Roger, our guidance recommendation uh is Pings and you're cleared for takeoff.

Roger, understand. We're number one on the runway.

Roger.
Rate scale, uh, 25.
That translation board checked.
Balance coupled on.
TTC checked.
Got push button reset.
Abort stage reset.
Deadband minimum,
add control, remote control.
Code control, auto.
Both auto.

Crew of Eagle going through their pre-ignition checklist.
They are standing by for two minutes to uh go to guidance steering in the X.

Eagle Houston, you're looking good, over.

Roger.

Alright, eight, seven, six, five, fourth stage, engine arm ascent, proceed.

That was beautiful. 26 36 feet per second up, 35. That's the lift off over.

Very smooth.

Balance coupled off.

Very quiet rides. There's that moon crater down there.

1,000 feet high, 80 feet per second vertical rise.

Eagle, Houston, the request manual start override.

Roger.

2600 feet altitude.

Eagle, Houston, one minute, you're looking good.

Roger.

I'm not going to do a thing, Mike. I'm just letting you know that I'm holding at altitude.

Okay.

I'm putting out cabin pressure.
And the funny thing, you know, I didn't uh I didn't feel a thunk, and I thought things were pretty steady. I went to retract there, and then that's when all uh hell broke loose.

You guys did it appear to you to be you were jerking around quite a bit during the retract cycle?

Uh yeah. Uh it seems that happened at the time I put the uh quartz X thrust here and it it's fairly it wasn't the dynamic, so it's uh somehow or other uh at some point to get off in attitudes and then the the attitude to hold the system cut it time.

I was surely busy there for a couple seconds.

Yeah, I heard you loud and clear. I got a horrible feeling.

Yeah, I agree with that but you did okay.

Is the pilot 11, over.

Uh Apollo 11, Houston, go.

Roger, I'm the first to suggest the oxygen flow in this thing is 6 tenths of a pound per hour, but being as how this training is doing, it's not working right. Could you give me an uh an updated number?

Uh, affirmatively, uh you want to go ahead and adjust your O2 flow until it just goes off the tag, and then uh crack the direct O2 valve back down about 5 degrees, over.

You really wait for that one, aren't you? Okay, Roger, thank you.

Hello, Apollo 11, Houston. How did it go, over?
Opened up the LRL doors, Johnny.
Roger, we got you coming home.
It's well stocked.

This is the commander of Apollo 11.
A hundred years ago, Jules Verne wrote a book about a voyage to the moon.
His spaceship, Columbia, took off from Florida, landed in the Pacific Ocean after completing a trip to the moon.

It seems appropriate to us to share with you some of the reflections of the crew as the modern-day Columbia completes its rendezvous with the planet Earth in the same Pacific Ocean tomorrow.

Mike Collins.

Roger, this trip of ours to the moon may have looked to you simple or easy. I'd like to assure you that that has not been the case. The Saturn V rocket which put us into orbit is an incredibly complicated piece of machinery, every piece of which works flawlessly.
This computer, up above my head, has a 38,000-word vocabulary, each word of which has been very carefully chosen to be of the utmost value to us, the crew.
This switch, which I have in my hand now, has over 300 counterparts in the command module alone, on this one single switch design. In addition to that, there are a myriad of circuit breakers, levers, rods, and other associated controls.
The SPS engine, our large rocket engine, on the aft end of our service module, had to perform flawlessly or we would have been stranded in lunar orbit.
The parachute, up above my head, must work perfectly tomorrow or we will plummet into the ocean.
We have always had confidence that all this equipment will work and work properly, and we continue to have confidence that it will do so for the remainder of this flight.
All this is possible only through the blood, sweat, and tears of a number of people.
First, the American workmen who put these pieces of machinery together at the factory.
Second, the painstaking work done by the various test teams during the assembly and the re-test after assembly.
Finally, the people at the Manned Spacecraft Center, both in management, in mission planning, in flight control, and last but not least, in crew training.
This operation is somewhat like the periscope of a submarine. All you see is the three of us, but beneath the surface are thousands and thousands of others.
To all those, I would like to say, thank you very much.

Apollo 11, this is Houston. We're getting a good picture of Buzz now, but no voice modulation.
And would you open up the F-stop on the TV camera, uh, try F2.2, please.

It should be a lot better now. We're still not receiving Buzz's audio.

Good evening.
I'd like to discuss with you a few of the more symbolic aspects of the flight of our mission, Apollo 11.
As we've been discussing the events that have taken place in the past two or three days here on board our spacecraft, we've come to the conclusion that this has been far more than three men on a voyage to the moon.
More still than the efforts of a government and industry team.
More, even, than the efforts of one nation.
We feel that this stands as a symbol of the insatiable curiosity of all mankind to explore the unknown.
Neil's statement the other day, upon first setting foot on the surface of the moon, "This is a small step for a man, but a great leap for mankind," I believe sums up these feelings very nicely.
We accepted the challenge of going to the moon, the acceptance of this challenge was inevitable.
The relative ease with which we carried out our mission, I believe, is a tribute to the timeliness of that acceptance.
Today, I feel we're fully capable of accepting expanded roles in the exploration of space.
In retrospect, we have all been particularly pleased with the call sign that we very laboriously

carefully chose for our spacecraft Columbia and Eagle. We've been particularly pleased with the emblem of our flight, depicting the US eagle bringing the universal symbol of peace from the Earth, from the planet Earth around, that symbol being the olive branch, with our overall crew choice to deposit a replica of this symbol on the Moon. And reflecting the events of the past several days, a verse from the Psalms comes to mind to me. I consider the heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars which thou hast ordained. What is man that thou art mindful of him?

Responsibility for this flight lies first with with history and with the giants of science who have preceded this effort, next to the American people who, through their will, indicated their desire, next to the four administration in our congresses for implementing that will, and then to the agency and industry team that built our spacecraft, the Saturn, the Columbia, the Eagle, and the little EMU. The space suit and backpack that was our small spacecraft out on the lunar surface. Like to give a special thanks to all those Americans who built those spacecraft, did the construction, the design, the test and put their their hearts and all their abilities into those craft. To those people, tonight we give a special thank you. And to all the other people that are listening and watching tonight, a blessed goodnight from Apollo 11.

Apollo 11, Apollo 11, this is Hornet. Hornet, over. Hornet, Apollo 11, read to the life clear, our position 1330 16915.

11 Hornet, copy 13301675. Any further data, over? 1330 16915. Hornet here.

Hornet, what's your splashdown error, over? The error, our splashdown area is our longitude 1330 16915, that's.

11, that's 599. Hornet, Roger, copy out.

No cigars being lit up here yet. We're waiting until the crew is on the carrier. A few are being wedded in anticipation of a match, but we don't see any lit yet. All right. The elevator will take recovery one down to the hangar deck, where the crew will enter the mobile quarantine facility.

And the flags are waving, and the cigars are being lit up. And clear across the big board in front is President John F. Kennedy's message to Congress of May 1961. "I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to Earth." That has been accomplished.

Roger, Roger.

Hello, Buzz and Mike. I want you to know that I think I'm the luckiest man in the world. And I say this not only because I have the honor to be president of the United States, but particularly because I have the privilege of speaking for so many and welcoming you back to Earth. Uh, I should tell you about all the messages we received in Washington. Over 100 foreign governments, emperors, and presidents, and prime ministers, and kings have sent the most warm messages that we've ever received. They represent over 2 billion people on this Earth, all of them who have had the opportunity through television to see what you have done. And then I also bring you messages from members of the cabinet and members of the Senate, and members of the House, and the space agency. From the streets of San Francisco, where people stopped me a few days ago, and you all love that city, I know as I do. But most important, I had a telephone call yesterday. The toll wasn't incidentally as great as the one I made to you fellows on the Moon. I made that collect incidentally, in case you didn't know. But I called three, uh, in my view, three of the greatest ladies and most courageous ladies in the whole world today, your wives. And from Jan and Joan and Pat, I bring their love and their congratulations. We think it's just wonderful that they couldn't have participated, at least through television, in this return. We're only sorry they couldn't be here. And also, I've got to let you in a little secret, I made a date with them. Uh, I invited them to dinner on on the 13th of August, right after you come out of quarantine. It will be a state dinner held in Los Angeles. The governors of all the 50 states will be there, the ambassadors, others from around the world and in America. And they told me that you would come, too. And all I want to know, will you come? We want to honor you there. Well, do anything you say, Mr. President. Anytime. Uh, one question I think that all of us would like to ask, uh, as we saw you bouncing around in that boat out there, I wonder if that wasn't the hardest part of the journey. Was that the only Did any of you get seasick? No, we didn't, and it it was one of the harder parts, but it was one of the most pleasant, we can assure you. Well, I just know that, uh, you can sense what we all sense. When you get back now, you've been able to follow some of the things that have happened when you've gone. Did you know about the All-Star game? Yes, sir. The Capital Communicators have been giving us a daily news report. Yeah, were you American League or National League? I'm a National League man. Me too, I'm a Cardinals fan. Yeah, that's right. There's the politician in the group, right? We're sorry you missed that game. Yeah. Well, oh, you knew that, too? You Yeah, we heard that. Yeah, the rain. The rain. Well, we haven't learned to control the weather yet, but that's something we can look forward to. Right, right. Well, I can only summarize because I don't want to hold you now, you have so much more to do, and gee, you look great. You feel as good as you look? Oh, yeah, feel just perfect, Mr. President. Yeah. Are you I understand you're Frank Borman says you're a little younger by reason of having going into space. Is that right? Do you feel that way? A little younger? Well, a lot younger than Frank Borman. There he is over there. Come on over, Frank, so they can see you. And Are you going to take that line down or the Yeah. Looks like he has aged in the last couple weeks. Go on, Frank. Mr. President, the one thing I wanted, you know, we have a a poet in Mike Collins, and he really gave me a hard time for describing you words of fantastic and beautiful. And you were I counted him, in three minutes up there, he used four fantasticks and two beautifuls. Well, just let me close off with this one thing. I I was thinking, as, as you know, as you came down, and we knew it was a success, and it had only been eight days, just just a week, a long week, that this is the greatest week in the history of the world since the creation. Because as a result of what happened in this week, the world is bigger infinitely. And also, as I'm going to find on this trip around the world, and the Secretary Rogers will find as he covers the other countries in Asia. As a result of what you've done, the world has never been closer together before. And we just thank you for that. And I only hope that all of us in government, all of us in America, uh, that as a result of what you've done, we can do our job a little better. We can reach for the stars just as you have reached so far from the stars. We don't want to hold you any longer. Anybody have a a last word? How about promotions? Do you think we could arrange something? Oh, I just please be back and very honored that you were so kind as to come out here and welcome us back, and we look look forward to getting out of this quarantine and and talking without having that. Right. Right. And, uh, incidentally, this these speeches that you have to make at this dinner can be very short. And if you want to say fantastic or beautiful, that's all right with us. Don't try to think of any new adjectives, they've all been said. And now I think, incidentally that uh all of us, uh, who the millions that are seeing us on television now and seeing you would feel as I do that in a sense our prayers have been answered. And I think it would be very appropriate if Chaplain Pierto, the chaplain of this ship, were to offer a prayer of Thanksgiving. And if he would step up now, Chaplain, thank you. Let us pray. Glorious God, our Heavenly Father, our minds are staggered, and our spirits exultant with the magnitude and precision of this entire Apollo 11 mission. We have spent the past week in communal anxiety and hope as our astronauts sped through the glories and dangers of the heavens. As we try to understand and analyze the scope of this achievement for human life, our reason is overwhelmed with a bonding gratitude and joy, even as we realize the increasing challenges of the future. This magnificent event illustrates anew what man can accomplish when purpose is firm and intent corporate. A man on the Moon was promised in this decade, and though some were unconvinced, the reality is with us this morning in the person of astronauts Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins. We applaud their splendid exploits, and we pour out our thanksgiving for their safe return to us, to their families, to all mankind. From our inmost beings, we sing humble, yet exuberant praise. May the great effort and commitment seen in this project Apollo inspire our lives to move similarly in other areas of need. May we, the people, by our enthusiasm and devotion and insight, move to new landings in brotherhood, human concern, and mutual respect. May our country, afire with inventive leadership and backed by a committed followership, blaze new trails into all areas of human care. See our enthusiasm, and bless our joy with dedicated purpose toward the many needs at hand. Link us in friendship with peoples throughout the world as we strive together to better the human condition. Grant us peace beginning in our own hearts and a mind attuned with goodwill toward our neighbors. All this we pray as our thanksgiving rings out to Thee, in the name of our Lord. Amen. Amen.

The sky.

