We are now approaching the T minus one minute mark, T minus one minute, T minus one minute and counting. Now in the final minute of our countdown at the 30 second mark, swing arm number one will retract.
T minus 50 seconds as we pass the T minus 50 second mark, the power transfer takes place. First stage, second stage, third stage, and the instrument unit going to internal power.
T minus 37 seconds and our count continues to go well. We'll be looking for an ignition of those five first stage engines.
At the T minus 8.9 second mark we pass T minus 30. T minus 25 seconds and counting and Apollo 13 is go.
T minus 20 seconds. T minus 20 seconds and counting.
17 guidance release. 15, 14, 13, 12, 11, 10, 9, 8, ignition sequence has started. 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0. We have commit and we have liftoff at 2:13.
The Saturn 5 building up to 7.6 million pounds of thrust and it has cleared the tower.

This is mission control Houston. We appear to have a good first stage at this point.

Flight Dynamics Officer says the trajectory looks good. We show one half mile in altitude at this time.
13 Houston go at 30 seconds.

Roll complete and we're pitching.
Roger that. Stand by for mode one bravo.

Mark, one bravo. One bravo, we are in command.
Altitude 1.2 miles, velocity 1500 feet per second.

13 Houston go at one, we show the cabin relieving.
13, Roger.

13 Houston standby for S4B to COI capability.
S4B to COI, Roger.
Roger, you've got it now, Jim.

You've got it, S4B to COI.

A booster reports that the inboard engine shutdown was a bit early. We're continuing to burn on the four outboard engines. 13.

Go, sir.

And uh Houston, what's the story on engine five?

Jim, uh Houston, we don't have a story on why the inboard out was uh early but the uh other engines are go and you're go.

Roger.

This is the Houston.
Copy that, Jim. Good deal.

Jim Level reports we had ignition.

Level reports would indicate we had a very close to on-time ignition. The total burn duration should be about 5 minutes 47 seconds.

Okay so far.
Houston, Roger.

We are hard docked, Houston.

Roger, understand hard dock. Good deal. Uh, Fred, one more thing on the TV, if you could come down F22 again.

Okay, you got F22 again.

Okay, Joe, I'm pointing over towards the and it's uh pretty bright with the earth off that window. Is that sort of washing out the picture here?
Uh no, Fred, it's uh it's not. We've got a bright spot where the window is. Uh the rest of your uh our semi silhouette, it's a pretty impressive picture.

You're a bad ready to uh pull the lamp out, Jim.
Okay, 13.
Okay, yeah, it looks like we're uh we're clear, Jim.
Okay, uh it looks good. It's weird because we get the TV about 10 seconds after you call it.

Okay, Houston, we have the S4B in sight. You go to maneuvering the S4B.
Houston, Roger that.
Joe, we can see it start to move. Uh however there doesn't seem to be a lot of debris or vapor coming out of it.
Uh, Roger that, Jack. Booster says that's great. Uh, he says the booster is doing its thing normally. Uh, Concur, we don't see much uh on the television at all.

Okay, 13. We've got uh Friday on TV.
Uh Roger, Houston. What we plan to do for you today is start out in the uh spaceship or uh Odyssey and take you on through from Odyssey uh into the tunnel into Aquarius, and show you a little bit of uh the landing vehicle. And uh, your TV operator is now resting on the center couch, looking at uh Fred Hayes, whose head is now tipped about at the typical of the tunnel, and his back is against the floor optical area and Fred will uh now uh transport himself into the tunnel and into the uh spaceship Aquarius.

You know one thing I noted uh, Jack, when I first came across here, that the starting uh upright in the command module.

And uh, heading down in the Aquarius uh uh there's a little bit of an orientation change that's not interesting. Once uh in the water tank uh, it's still pretty unusual. I find myself uh, now uh standing with my head on the floor when I get down inside the LM.

That's a great picture, Jim. Uh, you got the light just right.
And a nice thing, uh Jack, uh particularly for a novice like myself, is the uh the ease of uh moving around in here. It's uh, of course as you know from working in the uh command module simulator, it's really quite a boon to uh have zero gravity as an aid. It is uh confining really at one g to move around very much in here and it's uh quite easy.

And the lamb, as you can see, it uh looks pretty clean. I found a couple of loose washers, about it, and the uh little plastic cap off the uh sequence camera had come loose, and I found it uh lodged over by the uh ED panel.

Okay, uh Right under uh Jim now. He's uh actually standing on a, what looks to be a can here. And uh, for the sake of all the people back there, uh, how's that Fred in this can, is the uh the lunar mapping engine, where uh hopefully you can see my hand that's resting on top of right now. The engine that uh we used to get off of the moon.

That's immediately uh, adjacent to uh, the uh engine cover here. I have my hand on a white box now, which uh has been shown before. Uh, this uh happens to be uh Jim's uh plus, or the backpack which shall supply oxygen and uh water for cooling while on the lunar surface.

Uh, this uh device uh we hope to uh make use of for a planned 4 hours, and possibly up to as much as uh 5 hours.

Okay, uh, Houston uh, for the benefit of the television viewers uh we've just about completed our little uh inspection of Aquarius and uh now we're proceeding through the hatch again and through the tunnel and going back up to the Odyssey.

We might uh give you a quick uh, a quick shot of our entertainment on board the spacecraft which is uh keeping us company for some time.

The little paper recorder has been uh a big benefit. Has been a big benefit to us in uh in passing through the time away in our transit out to the moon, and it's a rather odd to see it floating like this in uh in Odyssey. While it's playing uh, the scene from 2001. Of course, the uh, tape would be complete without Aquarius.

Okay, Jim. We're seeing the tape recorder now, and uh just by the way, how long you expect to keep the TV on this evening?
When are they? Stand by, one.
Yeah, I got them with the uh cabin repress valve in there, Jack. Every time he does that, our heart our heart jump in our mouth.
And uh Jack, anytime you want to terminate the TV, we're uh we're all set to go.

Okay, Jim. Uh, it's been a real good TV show. Uh, we think we'd better conclude it from here now. Uh, what do you think?
Roger. Sounds good, and this is the crew of Apollo 13, wishing everybody there a nice evening, and uh we're just about ready to close out our inspection of Aquarius and get back for a pleasant evening in Odyssey. Good night.
Thank you, 13.

We've got one more item for you when you get a chance. We'd like you to uh stir up your cryo tanks. In addition, I have a shaft and trunnion Okay. For a look at the Comet Bennett, if you need it.
Stand by.

Houston, we had a problem here.

Say again, please.

Uh Houston, we've had a problem.

Maybe bust on the bolt.
Roger, may be on the bolt.
Stand by, 13, we're looking at it.

Okay, uh right now uh Houston, the uh voltage is uh is looking good.

We had a pretty large bang associated with the uh caution and warning there. And as I recall, main B was the one that uh had a ramp spike on it once before.
Go ahead.

And I'm here. We're starting to uh go ahead and button up the tunnel again.

Yeah, that that jolt uh must have rocked uh uh the sensor uh on uh C now 02, quantity 2. It's uh quite oscillatory uh down around 20 to 60%. Now it's full scale high again.

And uh Houston, we had a restart on our computer. We have things like and uh and the restart reset.
Roger. Restart and restart on our computer reset.
Okay. And uh And I was looking at our uh service module RCS. We have uh, helium 1, we have uh B is barber polled, and B is barber polled. Helium 2, B is barber polled. And uh secondary propellant, so I have uh A and uh B barber polled. P mag temperatures. Okay. AC 2 is on tip by my try to reconfigure on it, Jack.

We got a uh main bus A and the volt now 2, Sean.
Main A and the volt.

About 25 and a half. Main B's reading zip right now.
Uh Houston, uh odyssey.
Go ahead, one, Jim.

Can Houston, we'd like you to attempt to reconnect fuel cell 1 to main A and fuel cell 2

ready to main B.
Verify that quad Delta is open.

Okay Houston on show and I tried to reset the fuel still one and three above showing gray flags.
But to both on step on the flows.

Okay Houston, I have still 813.

That's a firm one of, uh, we're ready for you. We're, uh, trying to come up with some good ideas here for you.

Hey, let me give you some reading in the intern and help uh maintain AC Gold is check I've got uh bus tie AC on.

Say again, Fred.

The intern the help out main a voltage I've got uh main bus tie bad AC on. I would you rather accept the 25 volts the we're seeing on main 8.

Okay, bus tie AC on.

K Houston, we need Omni Charlie, please.

K Houston, uh, we like you to verify a couple readings for us. Uh we like the nitrogen pressure on fuel cell one. We need the oxygen pressure on fuel cell two.

Okay, nitrogen on one and oxygen on two. Is that correct?

Negative, oxygen on three.

Okay.

K, system tests uh one A.
Zip.

And uh two Baker, which is uh three oxygen uh says .6.
Two Baker says uh .6 and uh say again the other one?
Uh, fuel cell one nitrogen uh reads zero.
Roger zero.

K Houston, we'd like you to open circuit fuel cell one. Leave two and three as is.

K, I'll get the work on that.
And uh check, uh, our O2, uh, quantity number two tank is reading zero. Did you get that?
O2 quantity number two is zero.
Okay. That's, that's reading zero, okay.
Yeah, that's, that's the good one you see and I was to me looking at the uh patch that we are venting something.
We are, uh, we are venting something out, uh, into the uh, into space.
Roger, we copy your venting.
So guys, it's all set.

Okay, uh, fuel cell one, you just wanted it off the line now, Jack, is that right?
We just wanted you to open open circuit for you still 1.

Okay, off the line.

Apollo Control Houston, uh, this rapid exchange of conversation you've heard, uh, may the main be buss, uh, is off the line.
Uh, fuel cells one and three also off the line, uh, fuel cell two is presently on the line.
We now show 13 at an altitude of 178,643 nautical miles,
at 56 hours, 12 minutes into the flight.

K Houston, we see you getting close to gimble lock there. We'd like you to uh bring up all Quad C's on Main A. Quad C1, C2, C3, C4 on Main A and also bring B3 and B4 up on Main A.

K, Houston, do you read?

Yeah, we got it. Go ahead.

Okay, can you tell us anything about the venting? Uh, where it's coming from, uh, what window you see it at?
Coming out of window one right now, Jack. And uh could you give me the thrusters again?

Okay, the thrusters are one, one uh buses?
We'd like uh on Main A, we'd like Charlie one, two, three and four.
Also Bravo three and four on Main A.

Okay, got it.

Okay, 56 hours, 14 minutes now into the flight.

K, we need Omni Bravo.

Already Bravo.

Okay 13, this is Houston. Uh we like you to uh go to your uh GNC checklist, the pink pages uh 1-5,
to uh power down until we get a Delta of 10 amps over.

All right.

Roger.

Apollo Control Houston, um, that last report from Losma asked the uh 13 crew to reduce electrical load on the, the spacecraft.

Carry off. Uh, hard-on.
It's on the pink page of the 1-5.

Okay, uh, we'd like you to uh go down the power down procedure until you get a delta of 10 amps over.

Roger, steak. Okay. No problem.

Apollo Control Houston, uh, 57 hours 11 minutes.

Uh, 4.1.

We now show an altitude of 180,521 nautical miles.
Here in mission control, we are looking, uh, now looking towards an alternate mission.
Swinging around the moon and using the uh Lunar Module power systems,
because of the situation that has developed here this evening.
We now show a velocity of 3210 ft./sec.
This is Apollo Control Houston.

And we have a,
procedure for,
getting,
power from the lamp.
We'd like you to copy down.
Okay. Stand by, Jack.
That sounds like good news.

K uh, Jack, about how long is it?

It's not very long procedure, Fred, uh,
we figure we've got about 15 minutes worth of power left in the command module so uh we want you to start uh getting over in the lamb and getting some power on that.
And uh you ready to copy your procedure?
Okay.
Okay in the CSM.
Stand by.

This is Apollo Control, 57 hours 46 minutes ground elapsed time.
A black team of flight controllers is now on station in Mission Control Center, looking at possible alternate missions,
as we have an apparent serious oxygen leak in the cryogenic oxygen in the service module.
And now in the process of powering down the command module.
Uh, less than 15 minutes remaining of, uh, electrical power,
to the CSM.
The Command Module Surge tank has been charged with, uh, oxygen for entry.
Oh, I just,
say again please.

Uh we are curious about activation 11 in the DHF.
Okay.

The scheme of going across to the Lunar Module, uh, still connected with the open tunnel,
The Lunar Module would serve as a sort of life boat for the crew of Apollo 13.
Sometime later in the mission, uh,
it is expected that they would return to the free-return trajectory,
which they left yesterday in the mid-course correction burn number two.
At the perisenthion, near the moon, uh, they would use the descent propulsion system of the lunar module,
for trans-Earth injection burn at about 79 hours 30 minutes ground elapsed time.
This would produce a,
day early entry at about 142 hours. That is a day earlier than a nominal free-return entry.

We're continuing to monitor the situation and, uh, still live on Airground.

Jack Aquarius, uh,
what kind of return time does this maneuver give us?
Put you, uh, back in the water at, uh,
133 hours.

133, eh?
Firm.
Now that's an Atlantic landing site.
Landing, landing?

Firmative, uh that's the pad that uh we've given you, but uh we may change our mind uh later on, we want you to have this intel for now.
And that's the minimum,
Okay.
minimum time return.

All right, Houston, uh we got to, uh change the rest man to the one to which you were aligned, so we'd like to have uh,
Who a Nathan will ship that up to you.
Roger.

Mass roms on one minute.

Roger Aquarius, and you go for the burn.
K, thanks.

Okay, Aquarius, you're looking good.

Auto shutdown.

You're looking at 1685 now, check.

Okay, you're uh going on residuals, proceed.

K, when you say going on residuals, you mean, uh don't uh trim them, is that right?
That's affirmative uh no trim required.
Roger.

Apollo 13 now at a distance of 53,349 nautical miles away from the moon.

See now reading uh 4564 ft./second relative to the moon.
In two minutes away now from schedule time of ignition.

Velocity reading uh 4560 ft./second.
a minute away now from scheduled time of ignition.

Oh 13 now 5426 nautical miles out from the moon, travelling at a speed of 4550.
30 seconds away.
Standing by.

One confirms ignition.
We're burning 40%.
Houston, system 2 looks good at this point. Roger?
Houston, you're looking good.

Roger,
Roger.

For display shows less than a minute to go in the burn now.
Stop on 4 minutes into the burn.

Don't forget the set rig one off, uh.
Roger, shutdown.

Uh, Commander Jim Lovell reporting shutdown. The engine is off. We're at 79 hours 32 minutes into the flight.

Ah, Roger, understand SM Jet 13812, uh,
It's not that time critical, Jim.
Can we do it at any time, Joe?
I think so, but let me check.

Roger, Houston, uh that's affirmative. You can uh jettison the service module when you're ready, no big rush, but uh, anytime.
Okay, sounds good.

Apollo Control, Houston, 138 hours, 1 minute of the flight. As you heard earlier,
Joe Kerwin, uh,
told Apollo 13 that they could uh separate at their convenience,
that followed,
the time identified by Jim Lovell,
which would be some 2 minutes after what we had earlier calculated carried on the ground.
We now show Apollo 13 at a distance of 35,729 nautical miles away from Earth,
travelling at a speed of 10,400 ft./second.
I just,
copy that.

We copied that report, uh, from Jim Lovell of Service Module Separation at uh 138 hours,
2 minutes 8 seconds.
I mean, one whole side of that switch vessel.

Is that right?
Wait, by the, uh, watch out.
Wait, right by the high gain antenna, the whole panel is blown out, almost from the, uh, face of the engine.
Copy that.

Yeah, looks like it got to the, uh, FPS cell, too, Houston.
You could think the FPS engine fell off, huh.
Man looks, that that's, uh, just charred burned, strange.
It's really a mess.

Aquarius, Houston.
Go ahead.
Okay, uh you're going to start powerin' up the command module.

5:00.
All right, I'll update that 141 plus 30.
Okay, Jack, we copy, and we can perform.

Well, Jack Swigert indicating that they plan to jettison the lunar module in
about 3 minutes from this time.

Uh, Odyssey, Houston, we can give you a go if you put the logic on momentarily, please.
A, the 6 logic is on.
Okay, just copy that and you are go for fire wall.

Real fine.

Okay, copy that.
Very well, Aquarius, I thank you.

This is Apollo Control Houston, at 141 hours, 31 minutes into the flight. We've had lunar module jettison. Apollo 13, the age of Aquarius ended at 141 hours, 30 minutes, ground elapsed time.

Uh we are now in 3 minutes until time of drog deployment. Standing by for any reports of acquisition.
We have a report that Orion 4 aircraft has acquisition of signal.

Odyssey, Houston, standing by, over.
Copy that, over.

Okay, we read you, Jack.
That was Jim Lovell responding with the OK, Joe.
Mentioned there, that was Command Module Pilot, Jack Swigert.

We're looking at the weather on TV, and it looks just as advertised. Real good.

We're in 2 minutes now from time of drog deployment.
A report of 2 good drogs, coming up now for main chutes.

Odyssey, Houston, we show you on the mains and it really looks great.
An extremely loud applause here in mission control.

Extremely loud applause as Apollo 13 on main chutes comes through loud and clear on the television display here.

Apollo 13, Apollo 13, this is recovery, over.

Uh we have a report from the Iwo Jima that Apollo 13 had a distance of 4 miles from the ship.
The smoke you see is venting of RCS propellants, our reaction control system propellants.
They're calling you 5,000.
Uh, Roger Apollo 13, this is recovery, and your chutes look good.

13 and recovery, passing through 1,000 ft.

Okay, you are, Roger.

Okay, Roger.
The flight on this view.
Left one on the bay, sir.
On safely.
We're on a lot on safety.
We are on a lot of there. Splash down at this time.
13, copy over.
Roger.
Another cheer in the control room as we had splashdown.

