1 minute 10 seconds and counting, we still are go at this time.

Coming up on 1 minute mark, T-minus 60 seconds and counting. We are go for Apollo 7 at this time.

T-minus 50 seconds, the vehicle now pressurized and the vehicle is go as is the spacecraft at this time.
Coming up on the 40 second mark.
T-minus 40 seconds and counting. T-minus 40.
All reports look good from here in the block house at this time.
All aspects of the mission go, T-minus 30 seconds and counting.
We'll get ignition of those eight engines in the first stage at the three second mark in the countdown.
Now, T-minus 21 seconds and counting. We have completed our power transfer. The Saturn 1B launch vehicle which now weighs 1.3 million pounds is ready to go.
Coming up on the 10 second mark.
10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2. We have ignition.
Commit liftoff. We have liftoff.
This is launch control, we have cleared the tower.
Roger, TCHAR, clear.
12 seconds out and the roll program has commenced.

24 seconds out and Cheral reports the pitch program has commenced.

40 seconds, the roll program is complete.

55 seconds, the cabin is relieving. Cheral reported a little noise.
1 minute

1 minute 20 seconds into the flight. All systems go on the ground and in the air.

1 minute 40 seconds.

Flight director asks the flight dynamics officer, he likes it, and he says yes, sir, looks good.

Coming up on 2 minutes, mark 2 minutes.
We are having a status check. Apollo 7 has been given a go for staging.

Apollo 7, Houston, how close are you now?
We're close to about oh about 70 speed at tumbling rather wildly, so we better stay away from it.
Ah, Roger, understand.

Okay, separation pad 030 20 all balls.
Noun 82 NA 1618 plus 1221 00020 30847 Noun 48 NA 0 plus 05
Sextant star angle NA.
Noun 34 NA. Noun 43 NA. 359er 310 000
Remarks
This will be a Posigrate burn BEF heads down using minus X thrusters.
Burn will take place in front of the booster.
There is a slot panel.
There is a slot panel on the opposite side of one large sphere sticking out by the engine.
Do not have the flashing light. You are the three are working fine.
Ah, roger, copy.
Hey, what were the minutes on the Get Eye? I missed the minutes.
Okay, minutes on Get Eye 20.

Hey, we got you. I can see Izeley talking there.
Hey, Don, turn your head to the right.
There you go.
Hey, you're picking up. I can read it now. Just a minute.
It says from that uh lovely Apollo something. You guys should write Hi atop something.
Looks good. I can see Wally handling that valve and Don has a small in his face in there as well.

The destination is pretty good down here. I can see the center hatch.
It look Actually, I'm amazed. It looks real good.
Hey, Don, how about saying something since you're panned?
Say again?
Hey, I can read you. See you loud and clear.
Really looks good. I'm amazed.
They are coming in. The heads down, you want us to point?
Lean back a little bit. You're too close to the camera. There you are.
We'll have Cecil B. DeMille Staffer down here directing.
Perfect.
He forgot the shave this morning, Izzley.
Lost my razor.
Yeah. Some of the reproduction there are real good. I can look out through Wally's rendezvous window and I can see the Co-Add up there, the orb rate ball.

Okay, what's the next one?
Real close to Wally.
Says keep those cards
coming.
Keep those cards and letters coming in, folks. It's loud and clear.

It's been a long hours of support, Jack.
Okay, it's been real fine, Walt. Uh just a final update on the weather in the recovery area.
2000 broken winds 270 at 20. Wave height is 3 feet.
Roger.
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Mark T-minus
Copy that, babe.
55.
55.
Delta-V thrust, A and B, normal.
Very normal.
B, normal.
Main controller's armed.
Armed.
Number one, armed.
Okay, standing by for up-telemetry command reset.

I'll get that at 45 seconds.

Mark, 1 minute from the de-orbit burn.
Within 2 minutes after that de-orbit burn, the spacecraft and the service module should separate.
Spacecraft will be in a pitch down 48 degree attitude at the time of the de-orbit burn, about a 300 foot per second burn.
Some 10 seconds duration.
30 seconds, CMS, Delta-V in auto.
Delta-V in auto. Flight call recorder on.
Recorder is on.
Temperatures are counting. For general, 15 seconds. Roger.
15 seconds.
And Delta-V is counting. 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Retro fire.
Siraj says we're burning right on the mark.
We uh show that indication here on the ground with four good ball valves cut off.
And uh to emphasize the point, Wally added, "Very good."
Retro burn.
We're reading 259 hours and 39 minutes. Already we are 35 seconds counting up now from the retro fire point.
35 seconds from it.
Call program 61.

Temperature is 4920, Roger.

Temperatures need glycol to radiator pull, Wally.
My big handle, okay?
It's just cold there.
Okay.

Apollo 7, Houston, we're back with you.
Everything is 5 square, Jack. Everything came off hunky-dory.
Okay, we lost you there for about 2 minutes.

Stand by for post-burn update.
Okay.
Got a main bus A and main bus B under volt each at SEP, and uh we got all three batteries on. Nothing more we can do, reading 25.2 volt.
Copy that.
Confirm separation that last communication from Cunningham.
We don't have a time on it, but it is confirmed.
The service module and the command module have separated.

7 will have the uh post-burn pad for you in about 2 minutes.
Everything working beautifully, Jack.
That you're looking good, coming right down the line.
Just slap in the face and we separate.
All right.

Apollo 7, Houston.
Ready to copy.
Roger. Go with the pre-burn pad, you were that close.
Thank you.
How about that?
You're looking real good, Wally, coming right down the line.
Have to ride that.
I'm ringing and she's really nice control system.
Roger, copy that.

Uh the uh Carr says they haven't had a report for a minute or so now, but apparently they got very steady reports.
2000 ft altitude, 2000 ft.

Now, from the Essex, we're told that the crew has been reading our calls from here, loud and clear. We have not heard from them, however, the Essex has.
The last voice contact was at 300 ft.
Uh we got no visual sightings. Several electronic sightings coming in.
On that air bus.
Well, let's turn up and...
We're.
We're just standing by and waiting like everyone else.
We have a report from uh the Essex that recovery 2
Recovery 2 and Recovery 3, the helicopters are uh reporting intermittent signals. Uh they're trying to plot a bearing right now. They think they have something in sight.
They think they're reading something on their scopes.
Stand by.
Uh Rescue 2 is proceeding to own a bearing which they think is the spacecraft.
As yet, we have no range estimate.
This is uh Apollo Control Houston. Now uh Recovery 1 has established electronic communication with Apollo 7.
Now, we have a report from the Essex, that the spacecraft was in what's called stable 1 in NASA talk.
That means they were heads down, they were submerged there with their uh their blunt bottom side up toward the air, which probably precluded a lot of transmission. However, they have inflated, apparently inflated their righting bags or their flotation bags. They are now apex up, floating and uh they are establishing electronic contact.
Uh Recovery 1 has positive contact, and now we've got a we got the picture.

