40 seconds and counting, Tom Stafford making a final check of his computer. The vehicle are all stages pressurized at this time. We're waiting for the swing arms to come back. One should be coming back at this time. A second one at 17 seconds. Tom Stafford reports they are go. We're coming up in the 22nd mark. T- minus 20 seconds and counting.

17 seconds and counting, guidance internal. 15, 14, 13, 12, 11, 10, 9, we have ignition sequence start. Engines on 5, 4, 3, 2, all engines running.

Launch commit, lift off. We have lift off 49 minutes past the hour.

Stafford reports the clock has started. The tower is clear.

Okay, pitch is looking and looking good. Roger.

We are to complete the LF sequence. Roger.

Okay, Houston, one one Bravo. All right, Roger, one Bravo.

One Bravo is a in an abort mode, uh dealing with altitude, the function of altitude. Okay, let a little bit in there. Plus 55 seconds.

Cabin is relieving.

Cabin pressure is relieving. Downrange 1 mile, 3. 3 nautical miles high.

What a ride, babe. What a ride. Roger.

That's Gene Statter, Gene Cernan reporting what a ride. All right, Roger. You still looking max Q. Roger.

Can you continue through max Q. You're looking good. You were looking good.

1 minute 44 seconds down range 7 miles, 12 miles high.

You're go for staging, Ken. Roger.

Charlie, surely you didn't lose Snoopy on that staging? Nah, I think Snoopy's still there with you. Uh you're looking good. We got your gamma motors on and your trim looks good. That just beautiful.

All right, Roger. That's Ken, and you're go for TLI. Uh S4B's looking as planned. Good show. I got the old breakdown working on number two and coming up before you segment. Okay.

Engineer says the Saturn is go. That's right on time. Roger, copy.

Wait for standard, we're getting acceleration. Roger.

Roger. We are on the way. Uh Roger, we confirm.

Plus it'd be 27,500 ft per second. Prego. Roger, prego.

Okay, band. There's high gain. The TV is on and should be coming down to you, and I'll have to adjust it as we come along, into the S4B. Hey, it's beautiful, Jim. We got the black and white now with a little time delay on the picture.

All right, I've got it closed down all the way. Is that uh helping any? Uh, Roger, in the center of the lamb, now we still got a real couple bright spots uh but it's looking good in the color.

We can see the probe, correction.

Gene, it's really looking good. Uh the uh it's the silver panels that are reflecting real brightly. They're awful. Now's not two.

Right. The the resolution is fantastic and off just to the right a little bit.

I can't, Houston. Uh you can't believe the picture we're getting. The resolution is really fantastic. Oh, Snoopy sure looks good. Yep. He sure do. Yeah.

Hey, I don't know what you did, but they uh it's really beautiful now. Really great. We're just a little closer. Yeah. And the color is great. How's that for the front porch? Oh boy, that's beautiful. Currently, we can't be more than about 5 10 ft away. Roger.

Antenna is looking real stable to us. We show you closing quietly. I'll pick it up in a second. I hope. Roger.

Snap snap and we're there. I got two gray. Roger. You saw the doctor, Charlie? Good and heavy master alarm, everything looks snugg. Roger.

Okay, Houston. Now we can see the 4B now. Roger. Out of which window, Tom? At, John, looking at it off the hatch window. Roger.

This This is just to so that you guys uh don't uh get too excited about the TV and forget what your job is down there. We're ready for what we're about to proceed. Let me sleep among the stars. Let me see what spring is like on a Jupiter and Mars.

In other words, hold my hand. In other words, baby, kiss me.

We don't need it all. Fill my heart with song and let me sing forever more. You are all I long for, all I worship and adore. In other words, please be true. In other words, I love you.

I've put a little thought back to you. Roger, thank you for your thoughts and uh with this view of the Earth uh looks like the United States, the landmass of the US is showing up better now than it was a few minutes ago. Right, uh Bruce. Uh you can really see the Looks like New England states are kind of clubbed in there. All right. But uh the the main part of it's coming in real good. You can see the Great American desert, the Rocky Mountains, and the Sierra Nevadas there.

Apollo 10, this is Houston. Mark, you're halfway, over. Uh Roger, thank you. And uh based on president's trajectory analysis, uh it looks like no more midcourse corrections will be needed prior to LOI, over. That sounds beautiful. You're right on the money. You want to keep her to keep going and turn back, huh? I tell you, it looks beautiful going away, and it's going to look even better coming back.

Apollo 10, Houston, two minutes to LOS. Uh Everybody here says got the Okay, and we'll see you right on the other side in orbit. All right. Roger. 76-22-55.

We are getting data. We don't have any voice communication yet.

Hello Apollo 10, Houston, over. Uh Roger, Houston. Apollo 10, you can tell the world that we have arrived. Roger, 10. It's good to hear from you. We couldn't believe this thing. Where's Johnny? The guidance was absolutely fantastic, and we'll give you the the burns right now. This engine is just beautiful. I take my hats off to the guys in the trench. I love them. Yeah, kiss that man that runs the MSFN. I don't know if I can do that though, but I'll say thank you. Okay, Charlie, ready to copy the burn? Go ahead.

Yeah, say thank you big. You ready to copy the postburn report? Roger, go. Okay, the burn was on time. The burn time was 5 + 56. Our roll pitch and yaw angles guidance was all good. Our uh residuals were 0 minus .2 and 0. Delta V C read 7.0. Uh, that's minus 7.0. Fuel remaining is 37.7%. Oxidizer is 39.5%. The unbalance, I'd like to talk about the present unbalance is 500 increase. We're in a 169.1 by a 59.6.

How's the uh view 10? We have our stut geologists here overlook at the surface that they're report a bit a minute. Roger, standing by, over. Okay, we're just passing from the highlands over in in into the Maria area, and you can pass on the jack. We caught a couple of real pretty little volcanoes, and there's no doubt about them, and we got a couple of good high resolution photos, and it still looks kind of brownish gray to us here. Over. Uh, Roger, we copy. Yeah, that There was a place back there where there's that There was one volcano or whatever it was that uh it was all white on the outside but definitely black around the top of it. Roger. Charlie, it might sound corny but the view is really out of this world. Roger. We had a couple of comments on the back row that I won't repeat. Charlie Brown, Houston. Uh we're concerned about this uh uh yaw bias uh in the lamb and apparent slippage of the docking ring. We'd like you to uh disable and keep disabled all roll jets until after undocking, over and uh uh undocking attitude. We will not maneuver to the undocking attitude. Just hold what we got, over. Roger. Uh okay, fine. And uh Snoopy we got uh 3 minutes 50 seconds to uh LOS, over. Uh Roger. 350 to the LOS. And we'll see both uh Snoopy and uh Charlie Brown at 98 25. All right, we'll see you. Okay, Charlie Brown and Snoopy. 3 minutes uh going over the hill. You're go for undocking and we'll see you around the other side. All right, Roger. Roger.

to the Apollo Control at 100 hours 23 minutes. We're uh just under 1 minute away from acquisition by Brown. 2 minutes 23 seconds away from acquiring Snoopy.

Houston, Charlie Brown, over. Roger, reading you five by, Charlie Brown. Houston, Charlie Brown, over. Roger, reading you five by, Charlie Brown, over. Houston, Charlie Brown. Charlie Brown, Houston, I'm reading you five by. Houston, Charlie Brown, over. Houston, Charlie Brown. How do you read on high gain, over? I lock up on the top but I just don't read them. Charlie Brown, Houston, over. Roger, read you loud and clear. Uh Snoopy is go for DOI. Roger, great, sounds great. We copy. Now, that's awful burn. We'll fill you in when he gets uh when he gets to you but at uh six. It's six miles. Uh he was doing 65 ft a second on my uh six miles from me, he was doing 65 ft a second. At 3.8 miles, he was doing 73 ft a second. I think that confirms this burn. They're down there among the rocks, mumbling about the boulders, things right now. Ah Roger, Charlie Brown. They just saw Earthrise. Ah Roger. They they say they're looking up at the looking up at the uh

Size it now.

Roger.

Houston, Houston, this is Snoopy.

Roger, Snoop. Go ahead.

It's going. We are down among them, Charlie.

Roger, I hear you weaving your way up the freeway. Can you give me a post-burn report over?

Yeah, as soon as I get my breath.

The burn time is 40 seconds.

Okay, I'm ready.

199 proceed.

Roger, Lodge.

Okay, we're burning, John. We're burning.

No, Houston, we copy.

Mr. Gimble, I forgot about it, babe.

Got an engine gimble, but everything's good.

Burning, 149 to go.

Okay, throttling up.

127 to go.

Oh, the attitude, 107 to go.

86 to go.

40 to go.

20 to go.

Step down.

Okay, Turner, 1.5 ft per second, let me know that I'll let's go to eggs, attitude hole.

Attitude hole.

Mid dead band.

That's good, let it go right there. That's good.

Got it, babe.

Let's got it, let me get those.

Mhm.

Plus two, minus point plus point two minus point five and minus point nine of Burn is good, John.

Roger, I understand, the Burn's good.

Okay, turning okay, Houston, we're in a 190.8 by 11.8.

Roger, we copy.

Okay, Tom, I'll thrust past.

Two feet per second of stop. I'll start thrusting forward and you stage fire. That's your master arm on? Okay.

And you got to go up there.

Take this Take this burn on the eggs.

We see staging.

Got a good staging, let's make it on the eggs.

You get it in the Gimble lock?

She didn't, she didn't go, huh?

That stage.

Charlie, how's the staging? Good, huh? Wait till that thing blinks.

Charlie Brown, uh Houston, they got staging, it was they uh had a while vibration, but they got it under control. Over.

Roger.

Got a lot of time, 7 minutes. Watch out, I don't know what the hell that was, babe.

No Houston, you're looking okay for the insertion point.

Well Roger, Charlie, that was something we've never seen before. It was real good. We went to eggs and uh Computer here, still.

Well, I went through P30. Go on to P40.

And uh, let me tell you what happened there, real quick, if we come around with this insertion burn.

Now, with the attitude dead band, it started thrusting out and the thing just tuck off on us.

Uh Roger, we copy.

I can see where coming up.

Yeah, I come up to an insertion. So, I I got a hold of it. I tried to avoid gimble lock, and guess I did. Looks like we got a good insertion out of it, but anyway.

And uh I mean, a good staging out of it, and we're all set to go for insertion here.

Okay Tom, call on 686.

Okay.

No, Houston, stand by for mark, 5 minutes to the burn. Mark, 5 minutes to the burn. Over.

Okay, Charlie, we're with you, and I think we got all our marbles.

Yeah, sure coming down to that ground, I tell you.

I don't know, but I hope we never find it again.

Roger, that was wild, babe, and it wasn't the dab because you were in acts, that was acts.

Yeah, what dead band, we re-thought we were going to stage. Okay babe, I've got good act and everything's looking good, I got the attitude set so if we have to switch, we'll be all right.

Okay, 407 on monitor until the burn. We're at 4 minutes. Okay, 4 minutes. But that's hard to do with almost close on. Can you monitor asset pressure 1 and 2, let's take Take another look at it. That's looking good. Engines on push buttons are all resetting and they're board more stage reset.

But buttons reset. Act translation I mean uh Act translation for jets. Okay, Tom.

Houston, I'm not reading them, so if they don't make it, you got to tell me, huh?

Roger, their count down now, looking good. Charlie Brown.

to go.

Okay, Tom, if if we have less than 170 ft. or if we got more than 170 ft. per second to go, we are RCS. And we'll RCS max of 55 seconds, but we were RCS and only to go is greater than 170 we're RCS back, RCS back. to uh to our pad to V.

Okay, which is going to be right in peak 40 there.

X is looking good.

Well, I tell you, we were down among them again going backwards, you know that?

Look at that drill.

That's got to be, that's got to be probably time and back right there.

Awful close to see that.

Okay, 2 minutes babe, give it a final trim.

Burn time is 15 seconds, so it's going to go in a hurry.

120 ft. per second, 220.9.

50 seconds, 48.

Baby, let's make this one.

35 seconds.

After arm is on, engine arm at standard ask control at auto dead band me, and we're set for this attitude on the burn. I'm cutting down on 500. Okay baby.

5 8 7 6 5 99 3 2 1 Burn.

Burned? Okay.

160 to go.

Roger Snoopy, you're burning, you're burning. 140 to go.

100 to go.

78 to go.

50 to go.

20 to go. Stand by, Tom.

Okay, I'll null them out.

Oh, beautiful, beautiful, beautiful. Charlie Brown, the Houston, he got the burn off. We're in good shape.

Standing.

Okay, And congratulations to That's the 3.

That's the 1.

That made me feel better.

Ranger is 39 miles.

Okay, we're on burnt attitude, Charlie Brown.

Roger, almost me, too.

How about that?

Hey, Joe, we're about ready to dock.

Call us. We'll call you.

Roger that.

Okay, John, you're in about 5 ft, babe, looking beautiful.

5.

Captures.

Yeah, thrusts are off.

We got a capture, John.

Fire when you're ready.

Everything looks good in here, Tom.

Okay, mate.

It looks good.

All the colors are rocking the cabin, babe.

All right.

I can see you moving, all right.

Good.

We got him. We got him, John. We heard him in here.

Hello, Houston. Snoopy and Charlie Brown are hugging each other.

Roger that, we heard them down here. Okay, let's take Let's stand in our helmets, babe, until we get this thing spurt away.

Okay, John. That was beautiful. Just beautiful, babe.

Okay, Houston, we'll give you a countdown. We're all set to go for self, right?

That's affirmative. Charlie Brown, we're standing by for your account.

Okay.

Give you a five count. 4, 3, 2, 1, Fire.

Seven pressures holding. Snoop with some place.

Houston, uh, Charlie Brown over.

Roger Charlie Brown, go.

And when he leaves, he leaves.

Yeah, okay, don't back into that dude, now John when you get turned around.

Are you keeping it in sight?

Yeah, okay.

Joe, he talked off so fast. He's gone. He went right into the sun.

Roger, copy. We don't have any idea why he went. He just went boom and disappeared right into the sun.

You're giving us gimble angle to loss, to burn out of here, we'll be okay.

Okay, stand by.

This is Charlie Brown, this is Snoopy. Er, Charlie Brown, this is Houston.

Yeah, hope this is Houston. Uh, we're going to try to pick the Snoop up on our VHF ranging, but go ahead.

Okay, you didn't leave anybody in there, did you, Tom?

Uh, no.

I don't think so.

Okay, uh, this is Houston again. Uh, Tom, what we want you to do is to uh, in the attitude that you're going to now, this attitude we passed up to you, we want you to uh, burn plus X instead of minus X. And this should give you a separation based on this velocity, uh, which we think is due to that pressure in the tunnel. And uh, also we want you to enable uh, Bravo, Bravo 3 and uh, Charlie 4 jets.

There's the word AOS flight.

We have telemetry data. We're standing by for voice communications from the Apollo 10 crew.

Hello, Houston, Apollo 10.

Hello, Apollo 10, this is Houston. How did the burn go?

Uh, Roger, Houston. We are returning to the Earth. Over.

Glad to have you on the way back home, 10.

Uh Roger, the burn was absolutely beautiful, and Gene has report, and we've got a fantastic view of the moon now. Over.

Mighty fine, Tom. Standing by for that report.

Houston, the TV's being turned on now, and as uh, Tom's starting to pan, we have a couple quick short words for you.

Roger, we're standing by, go ahead.

[Singing]

Uh, Roger 10, this is Houston. We copy that transmission. Thank you.

Well, this fuel has got to be a fantastic thing.

5 4 3 2 1 Stop.

That's the transfer. I think separation was normal.

Roger 10, we copy.

Hello, Apollo Control.
Good separation has been confirmed.
Apollo 10, just crossing the West Australian coast and a long track toward the splashdown point 350 nautical miles east of Pago Pago, American Samoa.
Leaving air ground live for any transmissions that do take place prior to entry and the beginning of blackout.

Houston, that was a good setup.
Hello, Apollo Control, four minutes 34 seconds to entry, 18 minutes 34 seconds to splash.

Houston, we're sure six miles short right now and we're coming on in, going about 4G.
This machine is flying like crazy. Boy, it's really good.

Roger 10, we copy and we've got you on TV.

I tell you this thing is beautiful.
This sure was a few miles overshoot 1.7 1.2 cross range. We're falling about three and a half G's now, rolling right 60 degrees and we're practically on top of the target. DMS are 3 21 miles to go.

Man, it looks like I guess we're about 150k right now.

Roger.

Apollo 10, first, we're going to beat her shortly.

Roger 10, we're waiting for you.

It's reported from photographic aircraft in the area, that all three chutes are deployed, which is quite obvious from the television coming from the primary recovery vessel.
Clearly, twilight or early morning dawn at the ship. Still enough daylight to see the spacecraft.

Apollo 10, we are in the base. This is and we just need the immediate vicinity closing all before.

We had splashdown at 192 hours, three minutes, 25 seconds approximately. Spacecraft is in Stable 1, that is apex up.
About four miles estimated from the Princeton.

On behalf of the officers and men of the recovery group, I'd like to welcome Apollo 10 back to Earth.
Colonel Stafford, if you and Commander Young and Commander Cernan would share just a few words with the ship's company, we'd be very appreciative, sir.
Well first of all, it's really great to be back from the moon and all of us feel in great shape and I can't tell how much we appreciate all the support from the people around the world if you can see us back in Houston with Chris and Deke and George Low and all of them and also how much we think we've increased the knowledge of man's environment. We're going to press on here.
It was a tremendous team effort and it's shared overall of us and here's another man for the team, Gino.
You know the thing that made this possible is being a part of the greatest country in the world and it's great to come back to it. I tell you just tremendous and I like everybody in it.
We didn't hit the third wire but we came pretty close.
It's always good to see a big part of the US Navy waiting for a small part of the US Navy.

