Coming up on 30.
Mark, T minus 30 seconds and counting. T minus 30.
25 seconds and counting, we're still proceeding.
T minus 20.
17 seconds. Swing arm back. We have guidance internal.
10, 9, 8, ignition sequence start, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0, all engines running, commit, lift off. We have liftoff 11:22 a.m. Eastern Standard Time.

I think we clear the tower. I got a pitch in a roll program, and this baby is really going.
Roger, Pete.
That's a lovely liftoff, that's not bad at all.
Who completed?
Roger, Pete.

Mark one, Bravo.
Roger, we have full pressure.
Okay, we just lost the platform game, I don't know what happened here. We had everything in a wild drop out.
Roger.
I got three fuel cell lights and a C plus light, a fuel cell disconnect C plus overload running two major bus A and B out.

Apollo 12 Houston, try SCE to auxiliary over.
SCE auxiliary.
SCE, SCE to auxiliary.
Click one Charlie.
One Charlie.

Apollo 12 Houston, go for staging.
That's a really good catch, gang.

Apollo 12 Houston, try to reset your fuel cells now.

Inboard engine, out on schedule.

Altitude 33 miles down range 45 miles.

Got it clear as two gang.
Roger, we copy, Pete, you're looking good.
Good staging and good thrust on the second stage.
They're knocking our problems here, I don't know what happened uh I'm not sure you can get hit by lightning.
Your thrust is looking good, Pete.
Okay, I have a good GDC and Al has got the fuel cells back on, and we'll be working on our AC buses.
Right, Pete. Your fuel cells look good down here.

I think we need to do a little more all-weather testing.
Amen.

It goes the tower gang, that's a late train, it looks good.
Good show, Pete. You're in mode two.
Launch escape tower has been jettisoned on schedule.
And we confirm the engine skirt separation also.

Down range 122 miles, altitude 61 miles, velocity 10,000 ft/s.
We've uh we've got uh an ISS light on and we've got a cycling CO2 partial pressure high which I don't bother me particularly and we have reset all the fuel cells. We have all the buses back on the line and we'll just square up the platform when we get into orbit.
Roger, Pete. That sounds good.
Hey, that's one of the better sims, believe me.

We've had a couple of cardiac arrests down here too, Pete.
It wasn't any time for that up here.

Apollo 12 Houston, through Hawaii, how do you read?

We have data in thrust is go.
Burn looks good.

Apollo 12 Houston, in the blind, your trajectory and the S-4 both look good.
Roger, they look good here.
Roger, we're reading you, weak, but clear now, Pete.
Okay, everything's stick and boo.
Good show.

Apollo 12, moving into dock with the lunar module.
It looks good.
Roger, and the color is really great now.

It's beautiful. Smooth as silk.

I think we just saw you grab it.
We're on the way in right now.

We got a hard dock. Houston, she looks good. Both Barber, I mean, both A and B are gray, all that's made.
Roger, Pete, looks good.

This is Apollo control at 52 hours 56 minutes, CapCom Paul White is getting ready to put in the call to the crew now.

Apollo 12, all pressure in the catalyst bar, sir.
Roger, 12.

And that was Sweepers Mannier brooms on the boatswain's pipe that was just played up to the crew.

Apollo 12 Houston, you're go for Alway.

Roger, Houston, go for Alway, burn check list is complete to minus 6 minutes and we're holding a dead point.
We are on the other side.
Okay, Pete, we'll see you at 43:57.

We now show 15 seconds until acquisition, we'll standby for first communications from the spacecraft.
Our network controller reports that we have acquisition of signal at this time.

Apollo 12, Houston.
Hello, Houston, Yankee Clipper with Intrepid in tow, has arrived on time. Are you ready for the burn status report?
That's affirmative, go ahead, Clipper.

Okay, the burn was on time. The burn time was 5 plus 52. The residuals were minus 0.1, plus 0.1, plus 0.1.
Delta BC was plus 1.0. The fuel 38 decimal 4, the oxidizer 38 decimal 7. The unbalance was increase 80 lb over.

Roger, 12, copy.
Computer says we're in a 170 by 61.8.

Just like everybody else that just arrived. We're all three of us are plastered to the windows, looking.
Rod, understood.

Yeah, but the baby truth, it doesn't look like a very good place to pull liberty, though.
Okay, we give you an okay three wire on that one.

Very good, I hope we can say the same thing tomorrow. Same goes for tomorrow.

Apollo 12 Houston, your go for set.
Roger.
Okay, there he goes, he's burning.

And traffic Houston, you are off on that figure by 20 seconds. CSM was right.
Yeah, I had the wrong time. He's burning now and uh he looks good out there.
Roger.

There's star angle difference Houston, four balls two.
Coming at you with the torqueing angles.
Roger, Pete.

That's that grab. Yeah, you're looking at the Disky?
Those are great. You're go for DOI.

And Traffic, Houston, we're looking at an AOS of 109 43 30.

And Clipper, Houston, we're looking for you AOS at 109 41.

The director Cliff Charlesworth taking a final poll here for getting a go for PDI.

Go for PDI.
Roger, go for PDI.

Mark, one minute.
Watching the dirty peak.
Roger, Pete.

You got the Descent engine, you set empty in the vault, and a moving velocity light, got it, maybe.
I got it couple of lights.
Copy the turn, this light.
10, 9, 8, we have all 8, 7, 6, 5, row, having better start, 3, 4, 5, descend and command override on.
Hey, throttle up to 26. Yep, copy throttle on. And I can hardly hear you for some reason.
Okay, hit and bike, the throttle up, Houston. It looks good.

300 feet, coming down at 5.
Hey, that trailer's right where it's supposed to be.
Hey, you're beautiful, 10%.
257 feet coming down at 5, 240 coming down at 5.
Hey, you're really maneuvering around. Come on down, hey.
Okay.
10% fuel. 200 feet coming down at 3. Need to come on down.
Okay.
190 feet.
Come on down, 180 feet. 9%. You're looking good.
Get some dust before long.
130 feet, 124 feet, Pete. 120 feet, coming down at 6. You got 9%, 8%, you're looking okay.
96 feet, coming down at 6. Slow down to the center.
8 feet, 80 feet, coming down at 4, you're looking good. 70 feet.
Looking real good.
63 feet, 60 feet, coming down at 3. 50 feet, coming down. Watch to the dust.
46. Low level.
42 feet, coming down at 3, coming down at 2, okay. Start the clock. 42 feet, coming down at 2, 40 coming down at 2.
Looking good, watch to that.
81, 32, 30 feet, coming down at 2, feet, you got plenty of gas, plenty of gas, feet.
Hang in there. 18 feet, coming down at 2.
You've got it made, come on in there. 24 feet.
Contact light.
Roger, copy contact.
12. Yes. 12. Okay, switch the arm off, okay. That's actually valve, you got your command override off.
Yep.
Okie dokie, I will cycle the main shut off valve.
Okay.
Thrust is closed. I get both ready for this stage.
There they are. Ready to go.
Landing, he. Outstanding.
Cancel the arm on. Beautiful.
He's got that fire.
Hope you all smoke over the ascent.
Ah, the ascent medium looks okay.
Okay, descend red warning light. Don't worry about it.
Ascent extendable looks good. 82H2O.
Switch the fuel turned over.
Okay, the hot shape, Houston, we're in real good shape. Roger.
Can't stop you pushing.
Yep, probe. Both control, both auto.
Both auto. You get your command override off. Ah, engine arm off. Off. I got the 413 in cycle the partner valve.
Okay.
Thrust are I so, valve is done, main shut off done. You've done it.
Master arm on.
Master arm is turned off.
Master arm is off. Okay, just watch the system, stay.

Yeah. Okay.

Houston, this is, I'll tell you, I, I think we're in a place that's a lot dustier than the other. The good thing we had a simulator because that was an IFR landing. Roger that, we got you. Yeah, I bet I was high out. And would you believe, I know it. Holy crap. Yeah, it's beautiful out here. It sure is. It's something else. We flew by. How are you?
Thank you, sir.
We see a 30 slide.
Houston, Real AD Yankee Clipper, I got visually.
Roger and Clipper, will do.
Clipper, Houston.
For your info, uh, Intrepid has a visual on you.
Intrepid, we reach you loud and clear and uh, for your info, Clipper's got a visual on you, and he also picked up Surveyor.
Yeah. Yeah, ask him. And where are we?

TV starting to come in.
I'll tell you what we're parked next to. Yeah. We're about 25 feet from the Surveyor crater. That's good. It's where I wanted to be. I got, I bet you when I get down to the bottom of the ladder, I can see the Surveyor.
All right, so you guys won't take this with you, Pete?
Sounds good, Pete, just like you wanted.
Just swing her out here.
That's right.
Okay now, hold her there just a second, Pete, okay?
One second.
I've got a TV, Houston.
Roger, we've got a TV.
No, not yet.
Now, it's on the top of the ladder.
Okay, now look this thing all the way out of the bag and I want you to do it. Just do it. Huh? Adios. No, but this thing isn't all the way out of the, I think it is. Let me have this end of it.
I can be back up the ladder and on.
Okay.
Adaboy. What hand is that?
End of I want. This area here, too.
There we go.
Look at the deck stuff, go.
Pretty cool slides in the white thing, but yeah.
Here we go.
Look at the deck stuff, go.
Pretty cool slides in the white thing, but yeah.
But looks like we got 900 feet of this stuff.
Stay there just a second. Don't go down yet. I got to get my camera on you, dude. I can't get down yet, anyway, I got to look. To see how he steals what we did, okay?

That's the Lunar Equipment Conveyor swinging in the screen there.
All right. I'm trying to figure out kind of a snow I got here.
All right, now. Yeah. Will you look, could you look out the window? Sure.
Now, there the the paint.
Okay. Hey, Pete. Hey and that may have been a small one for New but that's the long one that's to be.
I'm going to step off the pad, Mark.
What is that popping?
Hey, that's beautiful.
Hey, don't sink in too far.
That's sigh a little.
Let's find some, right? That just like somebody.
Got a spotlight in your hand.

Okay, you're coming straight out and as long as you can bend over the better.
All right, move to your right. Good.
That's right.
That's a get the decent down. That's a point.
Look straight.
Good shape. Yeah, I pulled the uh hatch closed here, okay.
Don't lock it.
Hey, you're right at the edge of the porch. Okay.

Hey, if I had landed 20 feet behind where I landed, we had landed right smacking that crater.
Do it.
Well, it's kind of hard to mark the door, I was just picking that and trying to get it.
There you go.
I'll try to keep the door open for us there.
Okay.

Ready to go but I'll get my visor down now. Yes, sir, buy that son is bright.
All right, Houston, Mark, I'm on the footpad.
Mark.
You do a little boy. There you got it.
I'm in. No sweat.
Okay, and now careful when you turn around, you.
Yeah, careful.
Okay. Okay, we have you looking pretty good. Now you can do a challenge.
Hey, we've got our training ring, I'll get this out. Okay, it says let's be what it close we did that but with your hands closing lock when you're out of the way, I'll slide over and lock mine out of the way. All right, I might turn around.
Okay.
Okay. We get all the weight from these lock stick. Yeah.
We can push them. Wait a second, let me reach my five, use my feet and going on in there.
Okay. Can you push me down?
I am pushing you down.
Are you setting? Oh, that just just back up, let me tell you to the forward, this is this is good.
I think so that it's okay.
Let me close it, okay? Maybe you can reach it, just a little bit out of my reach, you might be able to get it.
Okay, I'm ready.
Can we get back and push?
Is it clear?

That's forward. Did you get it? Good show.

This is Apollo control at 128 hours, 51 minutes.
Uh we're still about 1 hour from the scheduled end of the uh sleep period. However the uh flight surgeon reports uh some indications in the biomedical data that the crew may be beginning to stir.
Uh so we'll be standing by live for any uh call from the spacecraft.
Calling this in Intrepid. How are you this morning?
Good morning, Intrepid. How did you sleep?
Slightly asleep. We're uh hustling right now. And uh, we're going to eat breakfast, have a little talk with you and get about our business.
Sounds good.

So, how about a great football sized rock. That's what I'm holding in my hand and these other rocks that I was talking to you about are pretty well buried and they're pretty large, I don't think I could get one of them going.
Is that good?
Roger, we copy uh grapefruit size or any size is fine.
Hey uh Al, are you standing still?
I'm standing still. Go ahead.
Okay, I'm standing still, Houston, on my marks.
And roll it, Mark. It's starting down.
Tip, tip, tip.
Now, it's just rolling.
Roll, roll, roll.
Still rolling.
Roger Pete uh we've got some uh jiggles that I can see here uh.
We'll get a uh reading on it for you.
Still rolling.
Still rolling, very slowly, still rolling.
And it's stopped.
Got it, stop.

That's interesting look where you ticked.
That's some lighter material there. Oh, I sure did, didn't I? Yeah, that's the first time we've seen that. Now, now, you know what it looks like here?
It looks like that maybe uh this darker material well, I don't know, I'm going to photograph that too, let me get. Okay, let me get this. Yeah, Houston is kind of interesting here. Pete walked across one edge of the rim here and we're about oh, 50 feet inside the the upper rim and he uh happened to scrape an area there with his foot and turned the uh much lighter-colored uh uh soil uh like cement.

Beautiful beautiful site.
Yeah, this one's brown and I don't remember I see any brown there at the cape. Kind of a light tan, or maybe that maybe that changed color. What color was this one Houston? White? When it when it started that?
Standby on that.
Yeah, it's like a light tan now.
Yeah, this crater isn't as steep as uh we thought, Pete.
Uh huh. I had better be careful I'm going to get dust on her.
Yeah.
And after I stop here, this will be the last step.
The equipment bays were white on the side and the scoop itself was a light blue.
Well, it's kind of it's Well, we'll get down there and get closer inspection. What was the general color of all the structures, for example, all the struts in there, like?
That's all white. The equipment bays and the primary structure was all painted with a white paint.
It looked kind of light tan or something, we'll have to look at it more closely. Now, that's what happened.
It changed color, huh?
It has, it must have cooked that white brown.

Got okay, loop around the other side of that. Let's get that camera. All right. Wait, you've got to open your bag.
Got it. It's not going anywhere, so don't be.
Now open your bag.
It's good? Got all the parts are working.
Thanks.
The the Joe Roberts is back, I'm going to do the job I think. Hey.
Turn it into this thing. I'm going to reach down in there and open it up.
Okay?
Yeah, that's the break.
The thing popped out wide open.
That's it, over there. Uh-oh. Yeah, it's not.
It's a little open here.
Every second that I stand opening it up is worth about 2 minutes when you have to put it in the bag.
Okay, I think it's okay. Hey, I got a shiny tube for you.
Okay, let me get it, let me get it.
Yes, there it is. That's a good one too. Here, me that. Watch your hand.
Cut?
Come on. Get the cut. Good cut.
It's a good one, Pete.
Okay, two more tubes then that TV camera and that baby's ours.

Okay. All right. Let's get them.
There's one.
Can you get that zip out of there? Yes.
Guys, that's that's beautiful. Beautiful.
Turn it on. Let me see it on you, man.
Okay.
It said write in that side. Hey is this is this color lighter than that one in Houston?
Let's let's get this tube while we're at it. I could take that whole leg thing with one hand and open the bag.
Get in there. Get in that bag.
Here you go.
In the bag. In the bag. In the bag? Wait a second, I got to zip it up. Good show.
Copy, it's in the bag.

Okay. That does the scoop. Ah there, that's the problem. That's what they said but Okay. You mean hold it? Wait a minute.

Let me, let me, let me help.

You got it. broke. That's good. Oh smooth as silk. Cut that part right. That's right. They wanted it, no. They wanted it just after that joint. So cut it right there.
Make it cut. They wanted that joint so you get it.
I have to look under, okay.

That's it, that's it.
That's smooth.
You got dirt in. You got dirt, you use no dirt. Okay.
Get that's the sample for you Houston. got dirt in. Well done to you. Say uh, when you move out from here, right? Well first of all, we show you uh 3 hours into the EVA and you're about uh 10 minutes behind the nominal traverse we have figured out for a 4 hour EVA. However, you're plus consumable, they're holding out real well. So, we suggest you go on with a nominal traverse. We may uh want you to cut down to perhaps just one sample at uh blocky crater.

Okay. Houston, uh if you can mark me off the lunar surface, on the footpad.

Roger, we got that data that uh 3 hours and 50 minutes into the EVA.
More than we asked.
Correct.
Huh?
You're just right.
Scoot it up, man. And it kind of scoot look look further in. You got it made.
I came to me now. Close the hatch. Open the hatch. You can lock as soon as you're out of the way. I get the tent. I wonder what that would be like.
They need to pick that up.
Okay, check that auto for uh so auto, if you do. But you can reactivate the Clipper, Houston. That has auto.
Okay, let me move out of the way.

Houston, um that uh we have everything stored, secured properly. Uh we're ready to uh start the launch countdown at the proper time. And if you'll give us about 15 or 20 minutes to chat down here, we'll come back with you and have a little kitty chat about the EVA. I'll say everything is tied down but man oh man, is it silty in here. We must have 20 pounds of stardust and all kinds of junk.
Repeat. That will be an interesting zero-D.
Howie and I make could
Al and I make uh look like a couple of bite two minute coal miners right at the moment.
We're happy.
So, I want a lot of people down here.
3 seconds.
Everything okay?
Roger. Everything is passed. All we like is pro and then after we end it, we'll start. Okay.
20 seconds.
Looking good, B.
10 seconds.
5 4 3 2 1 and liftoff. And away we go. Roger it is 5.
Looking good.
And and cut Houston. Copy ignition. Guidance looks good.
We are 16 feet above the lunar surface.
Boy, that looks exciting. Forward, I don't know what.
1, 36.
30 seconds. 1, 77.
1594 feet above the lunar. That's pretty good, right on our way and at one minute, you all right on the morning. Okay.

The right, right?
Okay, cut that spot. Look at the solar panel coverage. You suppose that's what that hits by lightning or something with on this ground. Look at the top of this burn.
But, I do believe that's what got hit. Now, maybe it gets burned by uh other uh I'm going to have to find out. That's a good do, alright?
Won't you move over to the left a little bit and I'll take a picture of it and take a look at it later? I can drop down the little piece.
Okay, safe, I'm going to pitch over 90 degrees now.
Okay, let's go. Alright. I'm going to be on the uh, you?
Roger, I'm trapped in.
Good. Just went.
That way.
Okay.
Okay.
Lifted off. I picked it a little bit.
Good thing.
Okay.
Pre-capture, after, a.k.a., go free, for heat. There you go. 368.
Yeah, it's hot. I thought it was supposed to be when they were free.
Yes, sir. You're looking good. You're making the rock, go ahead.
I'm just going to re-stabilize a little bit.
Okay, it's it seems pretty stable to me.
Thanks a lot.
Uh, I want the pitch down just a little bit.
Okay.
But the dynamics die out just a little.
Okay.
It's hardly moving at all.
Now with the firing, I want to keep come down a little bit.
Okay.
That is the rock.
Okay, I'll hit it down there with the attitude.
Okay.
Okay. Go ahead. Ready to retract? One, they have retract. Okay, Johnny Bravo.
Any luck?
You're hot, I'm free, boy. Okay.
That's looking good.
You got it.
Thank you, thank you.
Super job. That was cool. What a pickle.

We have acquisition of signal.
Apollo 12 Houston.
Apollo 12 and route home.
Very good.
Apollo 12, Houston, we're ready for TV, any time you want to send some down to us.
Okay, we're trying to get it in a good position right now. The uh, the Apollo one is a little bit later but we're leaving to move towards that so maybe better.
I, I, I found that I could walk. Uh, wherever we went, we lopped and, uh, it just didn't seem natural not to loop. And, but when you loop, you rewind to see of the pictures, the high speed motion pictures of, of watching they ran around or, or something like that. That's the the feeling I had as I lopped across as I'd have to step out and it just sort of hold what I had till I came down. And that's the way Al and I moved around on the whole traverse.
The funny thing about moving around on the lunar surface, you, you put on this, uh, pressurized suit we wear and you try to do it on earth with even close to the weight you have on your back, on the moon, and you get tired very rapidly from the walking. And, uh, you don't have to walk, you know, over, let's say, uh, 2-300 yards and you're you're ready for a rest. But, on the moon, in the light gravity, with the same suit on and the same weight, your legs never seem to get tired. I mean, I guess, you're when you run up the side of a steep slope, you can do it with just running around on a level ground, you you seem to assume some sort of a nominal pace, and you're able to, uh, you can go for long distances without your legs getting tired. The suit doesn't always want to bend like you want to bend. For example, it bends pretty well at the knee, and it bends pretty well at the ankle, but it doesn't want to bend not near the side, the top of the side. So, what happens is you you bend your run with your straight legs, land flat-footed, and then push off on your toe. And you think to yourself, "Well, I'm going to tire out my calves pretty soon because I'm not used to this sort of thing." But apparently the force it takes to push off on your toe on the moon is much less than you just have when you walk or run on earth, so your legs uh just don't seem as hard. You can move around, uh, rather easily, don't you think, Pete?
Yeah, I think I'd like to ask the doctors because I haven't any idea. But, uh, I I am sure that our heart rates stayed fairly low even when we were looping. I don't think we approached anywhere near the the heart rates that we had in just our normal walk through with practices, uh, in 1-G back in earth. And uh, agree with Al, you could go eight, nine hours, which we had. The other thing that we did, which I think was kind of interesting, everybody got worried about falling over and going down slope and things and I fell over once up there and then I wanted to pick myself up. And we just finally, to expedite things, uh, we'd either just fall over on our face, pick up the rock, and give ourselves a one-handed pushup, or just get down on our knees and get get whatever it was we needed to pick up down there. Cuz, we picked up many rocks that were bigger than this off, we'd pick up.

Al Bean reports three main chutes have deployed.
And we're in 8,000 feet, and we're down in good shape.
You have been recovering.
Tell contact.
Points down. Splash. 1, 4, 1.
We record splash at ground elapsed time of 244 hours, 36 minutes, 24 seconds.
Hello?
Go ahead.
Hello. Commander?
Commander Conrad. Commander, are you all three on?
Yes sir, we're all on the phone.
Well, I'm just delighted to have this opportunity to welcome you back and I only wish that I could be out there for the splashdown.
I can assure you that millions here in the United States and around the world were watching. And uh I uh uh am just tremendously proud personally and speaking also, representing the American people of what you've done. Uh, as you know, before you took off, we talked on the phone that night and I invited you and your wives to come to the White House for dinner and I just want to be sure you can make that date.
Yes sir, we'll be there.
Fine, well we'll expect to see you after you get out of quarantine. And now there's one other thing I think I should tell you that uh I noticed that you've been responsible for several firsts. You weren't the first on the moon but uh you were the, I think Commander Conrad, you were the first to sing from the moon, right?
And uh, yes sir. That's right. And it was the, the also we had the first moonquake as a result of your flight and the first press conference from outer space. Uh, now, after all of those firsts, I think that the nation wants some recognition and I have been trying to think of what would be the best way to recognize you. And over these past 10 days, I've noticed that, uh, Walter Cronkite and the other commentators are always referring to you as Commander Conrad and Commander Gordon and Commander Bean. And, uh, I, exercising my prerogative as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces have decided that you should be promoted and that from this day forward you shall be Captain Conrad and Captain Gordon and Captain Bean. Congratulations.
Thank you Mr. President. Thank you very much, Mr. President.
We look forward to seeing you.
Yes sir, I look forward to being there. Thank you very much, sir.

