This is Shuttle launch control at T minus 9 minutes and holding. Launch director George Page has checked on a number of problems which have come up during the countdown to determine that there are no constraints at the present time. He has spoken to the launch crew and says let's take our time. It's been a hard one. Watch all your data but we're going to do it right.
Uh he has spoken to the uh the crew and he's uh to Joe Engle and to Dick Truly and said, we're going to give you a good one.
We're in the process now of the test conductor going over the hold criteria with the launch team to let them know what points hold can be called and what the proper procedure is to call that hold.
Uh launch director George Page has told the launch team to take their time and do it right. We are standing by now to get word of the point at which we will be picking up at the T minus 9 minutes point.
This is Shuttle Launch Control.

The next major event we have coming up is the crew access arm retraction which comes at the T minus 7 minute point.
T minus 7 minutes 30 seconds and counting.
Everything going smoothly in these last few minutes of the countdown, leading toward a liftoff at 10:10 a.m. Eastern standard time this morning.
5 seconds away from retraction of the crew access arm.
T minus 7 minutes and there goes retraction of the crew access arm. This is the walkway attached to the service structure and used by the crew to walk across to the orbiter.
The crew has been advised to lower their helmet visors, and at T minus 6 minutes, will begin preparations for starting of the auxiliary power units.
The APU's are turbine devices fueled by decomposing hydrazine liquid, which provides hydraulic power to change the angle of the engines, to operate the aerodynamic surfaces, engine valves, and during landing, operate the landing gear.
Coming up on the T minus 6 minute point in our countdown.

Coming up on the 1 minute point in our countdown. Everything going smoothly.
T minus 1 minute and counting.
T minus 50 seconds, the firing system for the ground suppression water is armed.
T minus 40 seconds, development flight instrument recorders are on.
T minus 37 seconds. We're about just a few seconds away from switching control of launch to the computer sequencer.
We have control of the countdown now being conducted by the launch sequencers onboard the orbiter. T minus 20 seconds and counting.
The SRB hydraulic power units have started, the SRB nozzles have been moved to start position.
Coming up on 10, T minus 10, 9, we have go for main engine start.
We have main engine start.
Minus 3, 2, 1, we have ignition, we have ignition of the solid rocket boosters, and liftoff, liftoff of America's Space Shuttle and the Space Shuttle has cleared the tower.

Houston now controlling. The mission control confirms roll maneuver started.
20 seconds. Thrust looks good.
25 seconds, roll maneuver completed.
30 seconds. Columbia now 1 nautical mile in altitude.
35 seconds, status check in mission control by flight director Neil Hutchinson, giving a go at 40 seconds.
Columbia Houston, you're go at 40.
Roger. Go at 40. And Master Alarm, and it's the
48 seconds, throttling engine down from max Q.
Roger, ignore the master alarm, Columbia.
Okie dokie.
Coming up on throttle to maximum aerodynamic pressure on the vehicle.
Mark 1 minute, Columbia now 5 nautical miles in altitude, 3 nautical miles downrange, velocity now reading 2300 feet per second.
1 minute 8 seconds, pass through max Q, Columbia still looking good, throttling engines back to 100%.
Mark 1 minute 20 seconds, Columbia now 9 nautical miles in altitude, 6 nautical miles downrange, velocity now reading 3000 feet per second.
Mark 1 minute 35 seconds, Columbia now 14 nautical miles in altitude, 10 nautical miles downrange.
Copy, Columbia Houston. You can expect an EVAP. CW.
1 minute 45 seconds, coming up on negative seats where altitudes too high for ejection seat. Your negative seats.
Roger, negative seats.
Mark 1 minute 55 seconds, Columbia now 21 nautical miles in altitude, 18 nautical miles downrange, velocity now reading 5000 feet per second.
Standing by now for solid rocket booster separation confirmation.
That's T+205.
Roger, copy. PC less than 50.
Okay, looks like we got a good SRB signal.
Confirm good solid rocket booster separation.
Smooth as glass, Houston.
2 minutes 25 seconds, onboard guidance has converged. Units programmed, Columbia is now steering for its precise window in space for main engine cutoff. Columbia now 35 nautical miles in altitude, 40 nautical miles downrange.
Okay, you should have at 100. Temps are coming down and looking good.
Roger, Columbia. Thank you.
Mark 2 minutes 45 seconds, Columbia now has 2 engine landing capability at Rota Naval Air Station, Spain.
2 minutes 54 seconds, status check in mission control. Giving a go for 3 minutes.
Columbia Houston, you're looking good at 3.
Roger, copy, looking good at 3.
Mark 3 minutes 8 seconds. Columbia now 46 nautical miles in altitude, 66 nautical miles downrange. Columbia's 3 main engines continue to run smoothly. Engle and Truly really moving out now. Velocity now reading 6700 feet per second.
Mark 3 minutes 30 seconds. Columbia now 52 nautical miles in altitude, 85 nautical miles downrange. Velocity now reading 7000 feet per second. Return status check in mission control by flight director Neil Hutchinson. Engle and Truly giving a go to continue.
Mark 3 minutes 55 seconds. Columbia now 58 nautical miles in altitude, 112 nautical miles downrange. Velocity now reading 7900 feet per second.
4 minutes 8 seconds, standing by for a negative return and pressed ATO. Call ups by CAPCOM Brandenstein.
Copy for negative return.
Mark, negative return.
Roger that. Sounds good.
With that call up, Engle and Truly now committed to space travel and can no longer turn around and return to the launch site.
4 minutes 35 seconds, Columbia now 60
Columbia Houston, you're pressed ATO.
Pressed ATO. Looking good here.
4 minutes 44 seconds. For the first time, Columbia has a forward abort-to-orbit capability on 2 engines by throttling engines up to 107%.
5 minutes. Columbia now 68 nautical miles in altitude, 189 nautical miles downrange. Velocity now reading 10300 feet per second.
Columbia Houston, your normal throttles.
Copy that, normal throttles.
5 minutes 14 seconds. That call up by CAPCOM Brandenstein says that Engle and Truly now capable of abort-to-orbit on 2 engines without throttling up Columbia's engines.
5 minutes 25 seconds. Columbia now 68 nautical miles in altitude, 228 nautical miles downrange.
Mark 5 minutes 40 seconds, standing by for press to MICO.
Columbia Houston, you're press to MICO.
Roger, press to MICO.
5 minutes 55 seconds, the press to MICO call from CAPCOM Brandenstein says, should Columbia lose but 1 engine, press on, keep flying forward. Columbia's engines have enough energy to to achieve normal attitude. Single engine rotor and everything is looking good.
Okay, Dan, single engine rotor and looking good here.
Mark 6 minutes 18 seconds, that report from CAPCOM Brandenstein indicates if a 2 engine failure occurred, Columbia is capable of an emergency landing at Rota Naval Air Station, Spain.
Mark 6 minutes 30 seconds. Columbia now 68 nautical miles in altitude, 346 nautical miles downrange. Velocity now reading 14900 feet per second.
Mark 6 minutes 50 seconds. Columbia now 67 nautical miles in altitude, 397 nautical miles downrange. Columbia pitching over now, diving to increase velocity, decrease altitude, giving Columbia her most favorable attitude.
7 minutes 5 seconds, standing by now for single engine press to MICO.
Columbia Houston, your single engine press to MICO.
Roger that, single engine press, and looking good, Dan.
7 minutes 20 seconds, that report says that Engle and Truly can achieve normal engine cutoff targets even if 2 engines go out.
Mark 7 minutes 30 seconds. Columbia now 64 nautical miles in altitude, 511 nautical miles downrange. Velocity now reading 20000 feet per second.
7 minutes 43 seconds, G forces building for Engle and Truly now, coming up to 3 Gs. Columbia now 63 nautical miles in altitude, 562 nautical miles downrange.
Mark 8 minutes,
Columbia Houston, you're go at 8.
You're go at 8.
Columbia's main engines slowly being throttled back now, should be throttled at 65% at 6 seconds before main engine cutoff. Columbia now 63 nautical miles in altitude, 645 nautical miles downrange. Velocity now reading 24000 feet per second.
8 minutes 28 seconds, standing by now for main engine cutoff.
Okay, Houston, we got a good MICO.
Roger, we copy, Columbia.
Confirmed shutdown. Columbia now returned to space. Not yet returned to orbit. Standing by now for external tank separation.
Columbia Houston, you can ignore the IMU bytes.
Roger, Houston. And we got ET Sep.
Roger on the sep.
8 minutes 58 seconds, confirm external tank separation.
ET Sep, and a rate checker.
Columbia now
Roger, we copy.
Columbia now performing a vasive maneuver moving below and beyond the external tank.
9 minutes 15 seconds.
Go/No-Go status check in mission control for the first Oms burn.
Roger, Columbia, we're looking at them.
Columbia Houston, your go for nominal Oms-1, and for APU shutdown on time.
Okay, Dan, and we're maneuvering to attitude now.
Roger.
9 minutes 44 seconds. Columbia now maneuvering to Oms-1 burn attitude using the two 6000 lb thrust engines. Oms-1 will be posigrade, moving Columbia forward and higher on her flight path, placing Columbia in orbit.
Columbia Houston, we're convinced those IMU were software bytes right at MICO, no problem.
Okay, and we got the free on loop, I believe that's AT temp, but we'll catch it in manual time, we get the Oms burn off.
Roger, the EVAP is shut down, we'll need it cycled off and then back to primary on.
Okay, we got a good Oms ignition and everything looks good.
Roger.
And understand you want the free on loop cycle back on.
A negative, that's the EVAP.
Roger that, copy.
10 minutes 48 seconds, a burning status check in the control center.
And Columbia Houston, we're about 40 seconds from LOS, both Oms engines look good going over the hill, configure LOS, we'll see at Madrid.
Okay, Dan, we'll see you there. Burn looks good and steady.
Shuttle Control, Houston, 11 minutes
Roger, and your APU temp are coming down.
Roger, thank you.
And we've just got an APU3 temp and I'm on B on the power controller.
Roger, we see that, Columbia.
11 minutes 30 seconds.
11 minutes 50 seconds, a loss of signal now with Columbia through Bermuda. The next station will to acquire will be Madrid. This is Shuttle Control, Houston.

Shuttle Control, Houston, 40 minutes, mission elapsed time. About 2 minutes away now from the ignition of the second Oms burn.
Columbia Houston, uh for your APU we like that APU pump valve cooling to bravo. Bravo to Auto for uh that problem.
Okay. Okay, Bravo is in Auto, do you want to leave A in Auto or turn it off?
We'd like Alpha off, and uh we're standing by to watch the burn, the Gimbal check looked good.
Okay, Dan, thank you. We're configured for the burn.
Columbia now
We're configured for the burn.
12 minutes 48 seconds, burning status check in the control center.
And Columbia Houston, we're about 40 seconds from LOS, both Oms engines look good going over the hill. Configure LOS, we'll see at Madrid.
Okay, Dan, we'll see you there. Burn looks good and steady.
Shuttle Control, Houston, 11 minutes, mission elapsed time.
Roger, and your APU temp are coming down.
Roger, thank you.
And we've just got an APU3 temp and I'm on B on the power controller.
Roger, and we see that, Columbia.
11 minutes 30 seconds.
11 minutes 50 seconds, a loss of signal now with Columbia through Bermuda. The next station will to acquire will be Madrid. This is Shuttle Control, Houston.
Shuttle Control, Houston, 40 minutes mission elapsed time. About 2 minutes away now from the ignition of the second Oms burn.
Columbia Houston, uh for your APU we like that APU pump valve cooling to bravo. Bravo to Auto for uh that problem.
Okay, okay, Bravo is in Auto, do you want to leave A in Auto or turn it off?
We'd like Alpha off, and uh we're standing by to watch the burn, the gimbal check looked good.
Okay, Dan, thank you. We're configured for the burn.
Columbia now

on attitude now, proper attitude for the second.
Okay, we got two good engines on.
Roger, burning and status checking the control center. Joe Engle reports two good engines.
In Columbia, Houston, is looking good to us. We're 40 seconds from SOS. You can configure SOS, we'll see you at Madrid at correction at yet at 52 plus 00.
Okay, now, we'll see you, and the engines are looking good here.
Guidance is stable as a rock.
This is shuttle control, Houston. 43 minutes mission lapse time. A loss of signal now with Columbia through Indian Ocean. Next station to acquire is in nine minutes. This is shuttle control, Houston.
This is shuttle control, Houston at 45 minutes mission lapse time.
The flight surgeon reports the following heart rates for the crew of Columbia. At launch, Commander Joe Engle's rates read 110 with a high of 120.
A pilot Dick Truly rates red at launch, 86 with a high of 94.
At 45 minutes 34 seconds. This is mission control, Houston.
Shuttle control, Houston. 3 hours 19 minutes mission lapse time. Flight director Neil Hutchinson is going around the room at the present time, a go-no-go to stay on orbit.
And we got about another 25 seconds to go on fuel. So waiting on your instructions about fuel.
Astronauts Engle and Truly giving a go to stay on orbit.
Roger, understand. I just said we're about through with the purge on and I'm waiting on your instructions on whether to purge or not.
Roger, we still don't have an answer on that. Do not purge that one. We'll talk to you at the car concerning it.
Okay, will we leave the purge on or?
Yes, we'd like the purge left on.
Okay.
Okay, the purge is complete on fuel and it looks good on top.
Roger, it looks good to us. We're 25 seconds from SOS. And your go for orbit op. everything is looking good. and we'll have an answer for you on fuel.
Okay, we'll see you there, Dan. Thank you much. We understand. We're go forward.
That's affirmative. Your go for orbit.
In Columbia, Houston.
I need okay Dan. And we just had a master alarm with, we're not able to find out what it was to trip it off.
Roger, Columbia. We'll take a look at that and what we'd like to do now is we'd like to do a fuel cell number one shutdown.
There'll be no power down required. We're running about a breakthrough between the O2 and the H2 and that procedure is on page 5-7 of the orbit pocket checklist.
And we still plan to do Holmes three and four going uphill. We just want to shut this fuel cell down while we think about it.
Okay, standing by, just a second then.
That call up from Capcom, Dan and Brandenburg stein telling the crew of Columbia to take fuel cell.
Roger, Richard, it's page 5-7 on Orbit Pocket checklist.
Telling the crew aboard Columbia to shut down fuel cell number one. The concern is the mix of possible mix of oxygen and hydro
we've done everything in through step 3 except off the fuel cell.
And so I'll do that down fuel cell number one.
Roger, fuel cell one.
We repeat fuel cell number one is being shut down.
Okay, Dan, we got the master alarm again and the cabin atmosphere is clicking on intermittently.
Roger, Columbia, we copy that.
Roger, Columbia, on that cabin atmosphere we believe it's temperature's probably getting a little warmer in there and it's a bumping the pressure high.
If you're uncomfortable as far as temperature goes, you can go flash EVAP primary B.
Okay, understand then. We are not uncomfortable. So we'll just live with it for now.
I'm sorry. We are not uncomfortable so we'll just live with it for now.
Okay and that you know then probably was causing the CW.
I know, thank you.
In Columbia, Houston, on fuel cell one, we'd like to react valves closed. It's not in the procedure, but we would like to react valve closed on fuel cell one.
Okay. Fuel cell one is shut down. The reactive valves are closed, main A is tied to main B.
Roger, we see that. It looks good to us. Thank you.
And then now that we've done that, do you still want to continue with that sampling of the water?
Oh, that's a negative, Columbia.
Okay.
And then I'm sure you'll be interested in knowing that I guess you haven't seen much TV or maybe you have the Holmes pods and the tail looks real clean.
Roger, glad to hear it. We did see a little bit of it. It looks good to us, too.
Everything in the payload bay looks real good. There may be a little bit of frizzy out on the starboard side of the tail toward the bottom. It's in the shadow now, so I'm not sure about that. But the payload bay looks in excellent condition.
And we have seen very little debris floating around either in the payload bay or in the cabin. A couple little washers in the cabin, but generally everything is real ship-shape.
Roger, glad to hear it.
You bet.
And Dan, I know we haven't had time to talk about it, but every second that we paid attention
And we've really been having a lot of fun up here, even though there's a lot of diddies going on.
Roger, Columbia, you cut out on some of that, but we did get did get the update that you're having a good time.
You bet. And we're both feeling real well.
Uh, you guys must be tough.
Yeah.
Shuttle control, Houston, now receiving data through Hawaii.
6 hours mission lapse time.
Okay Dan, regional on clear.
Roger, we're reading you loud and clear, also.
And Dan, what you all are thinking on Holmes three and four now?
Roger, you must be reading Neil's mind. He was just giving me a brief. We are planning on doing Holmes three alpha and bravo with the DTOs and four and we're also working up a fuel cell procedure to safe that a little bit further.
Good show, Dan.
Have you guys gotten a chance to eat your lunch yet?
And I had the sandwich that was in my pressure suit this morning and I think Joe is down there maybe getting something for himself now.
Okay, that's good.
Yeah, I'm getting a TV set up. I'll grab a sandwich as I get it done.
And Columbia, Houston, just to give you a little foresight into what we're planning on doing on the fuel cell, we will have a procedure for you later. We're working it up now, but on fuel cell one, what we plan to do is leave the reactant valves closed and then start up fuel cell number one and let it use the reactants that are in the system to run itself until all the reactants are used up. That way we get those two the hydrogen and oxygen out of there and safe the fuel cell good.
Roger, Dan, do you think we can recover the fuel cell for this later?
I don't believe we can.
Okay. Well, we'll wait on you to figure out exactly what to do and we'll be ready.
Roger, thank you.
In Columbia, Houston, looking down the road with this fuel cell being safe and not being able to start it up. We'll probably be looking at the minimum mission.
Okay Dan, we understand.
This is shuttle control, Houston, 6 hours 22 minutes. That discussion between Dan Brandenstein and the crew aboard Columbia. He gave the crew a preliminary insight and a procedure that's being worked to turn on fuel cell one, leave the reactants offline. This burns up the reactants, everything inside goes and the fuel cell is finished. This is a conservative procedure to avoid reactant contact. This brings into into play the mission rule that calls for a minimum mission, a 54 hour mission with one fuel cell permanently offline. We're at 6 hours 23 minutes mission lapse time continuing to monitor. This is shuttle control, Houston.
Okay, then we'd like to run a tape for you that came direct from the town of Forest, Mississippi, from the high school chorus there. It'll last about a minute and we'll have about a minute after that to chat. Over.
Hey, okay, Rick, do it, please.
On the way.
That's it.
Hey Rick, that's beautiful. Please thank them and tell them I couldn't have had a nicer birthday than this one. Appreciate it.
We'll sure do it.
And now, over to
Pigtail, I need piggy. It's time to contact the Columbia and speak to the astronauts. Really and truly? No, Engle and Truly. That's Strange Park. That joke's been used before. That doesn't matter, so is their spacecraft. Open the communications like, "Will you first meet, Piggy?" Of course, Mon Capitaine. Uh, this is the spaceship swine thrub calling the Columbia. Now introduce me, Doctor Strange Park. Stand by for a message from our Captain Link Hogthrob. Oh, brother. My fellow astronauts, I send greeting to Commander Joseph Engle and Pilot Richard Truly. We are all engaged in a great adventure. We welcome you to brave pigs to outer space. You blew it, Linky baby. Joe, Henry, and Richard are not pigs, Mon Capitaine. Well, they're human beings. Oh. Well, there goes the neighborhood. If you thought you were insulted today, tune in tomorrow for Pigs in Space.
Hey Houston Columbia, how do you read?
Roger, read you loud and clear. We're about to go over the hill. Madrid is next at 20:59.
Okay, we'll see you there.
Hey good, Jim. Well, glad to talk to you. We'll see you there. Hope everybody's doing real good on board.
Roger here, same.
Okay, Sally, we've got the arm secured right now. We're just getting ready to activate the survey. We've got the power on and we're getting ready to turn it on.
Okay, sounds good.

You sound mighty good too.

And uh Sally, I'll be glad to let you know uh where we are in the checklist on arm and tension.

Okay, go ahead.

Okay, the arm uh is out for the first time. She's been deployed, working great. We have uh done all the way uh through page 1-12 and we're sitting uh waiting for the data take to be over to get back into it and do the THC phasing uh or unloaded on page 1-13.

Suggestion about the uh latch worked fine. I uh used direct mode and uh did a little with it a couple of times and uh ended up with all three grades.

Okay, that sounds great and you guys do good work.

Columbia, Houston, how do you read?

Houston, PLT, read you loud and clear.

Okay, you're loud and clear now too, and we copied your RMS comments and it sounds great.

Okay.

We have a picture coming in now.

And well, we've got a SURA data take going, we'd like you to take the Primary B SAS controller off and then back on.

Okay, Sally. Thank you. I didn't even see that it had uh come down yet.

Houston, Columbia.

Go ahead.

Roger, are you getting uh TV down there?

Uh we had a great picture of the flag from camera Delta and now we've got a test better.

Okay, uh if you get a chance during the pads uh why don't you get in to look at the uh RMS elbow camera and and uh tell us when uh you can do that if uh if you get it locked up.

Okay, we'll do that and we've got a picture of the flag back and we'll coordinate with Inco.

Super.

Columbia, Houston, we've got the uh we've got the elbow camera.

Okay.

Hi Mom.

Even at this rate speed.

And uh, Sally, you can uh tell Inco he can use any of the cameras now that he likes. We'll not be uh using them again until after the SURA pass.

Okay, we copy. Thank you.

And, Sally, you might tell uh Inco that the cabin TV is operating now, if he wants to tune in on that also.

Okay, we'll tell him.

Columbia, Houston, uh while you've got a minute, we'd like to cycle the cabin fans and the way we'd like to do that is have you turn cabin fan A on, let us verify that it's on, and then we'll give you a go to cycle B off.

Okay, sure enough.

Looks like there's a little it's a little cloudy out here, Sally. It's a good thing the SURA sees through that.

And, Columbia, we would like to get the cabin fans changed as soon as possible.

That's A is on, Sally.

And we can hear it crank up on board.

Okay, standby.

Okay, we see fan A on and we'd like you to take Bravo off now.

Okay, Bravo's off.

Okay, and be advised that we're looking at a great picture from looks like uh Camera Delta of the arm and the Earth.

Good shot. Hey, very good.

And we're looking inside the cabin now. Looks like you're having some trouble with your cab.

Roger that. It's like always, Sally.

We're ready to copy uh the words you've got for us.

Okay, uh first, bad news. Our plan is that uh we're running a minimum mission and you'll be coming in tomorrow.

Uh boy. I tell you what. You're garbled and unreadable there, Sally.

Want me to say it again?

I got a real uh kind of a low frequency uh squeal in the background that's kind of oscillatory.

Okay. How's that?

Oh, that's much better.

Okay, you get to hear the bad news one more time then. We're running a minimum mission and you'll be coming in tomorrow.

Oh, okay. That's not so good.

Think of it that you got all of the good Osta data and all the RMS data and you just did too good a job. We're going to bring you in early.

Okay.

Columbia, Houston, we're AOS buckhorn for four minutes over.

Roger, Houston, Columbia, read you loud and clear.

Roger Joe, you're loud and clear and uh Dan and I are proud to say that we uh have a visiting Capcom here with us today and uh he's asked to speak to the crew of the Columbia Amer- America's Pride and uh with your permission, we'll turn this pass over to him.

Joe, Dick. This is Ronald Reagan.

Hello, Mr. President.

Hello. I just uh I wanted to make a request. Uh, I just wondered if, when you go over Washington before you're landing at Edwards Air Force Base, could you pick me up and take me out. I haven't been to California since last August.

We'd be proud to, sir.

Okay, thank Thank you very much. Let me just say, I'm sure you know how proud everyone down here is, and how this whole nation, I'm sure the world, but certainly America has got its eyes and its heart on you.

Well, thank you very much Mr. President. We're uh we're awfully uh honored that we've got the opportunity to uh to take part in this and I'm sure that uh I'm sure that uh we're very glad that you're getting a chance to meet all the people there at Houston that are making it happen.

Well, I've enjoyed meeting them. I told them when I came in, this was a rare experience for an old horse cavalry officer.

Mr. President, we certainly do appreciate uh your taking the trouble to show all the people working on the space shuttle how much you care and it makes us mighty proud.

Well, I care and again, God bless you both and all of us here are watching with great pride.

Thank you very much, sir.

Thank you, sir. Very much.

Thank you.

And while you're doing all that, uh we've got some morning music for you and a few words from the crew of the Swine Trek.

Okay, send them up.

Okay, it's on its way.

Well, link today is the day for the Columbia to end its mission. I'm going to miss them. It was my serving company. Ah, and in a little while, we'll be re-entering the atmosphere of Mother Earth. Well, I hope they solved their problems with those heat tiles. At least, they've got tiles. Yeah, we got shingles. Whoever heard of putting shingles on a spaceship? It looks silly. I think it's quaint. We look like a floating hunting lodge. You'd love it, Joe Henry. Anyway, we wish the Columbia happy landings. We will be staying here in the outer reaches of space. Our mission is not complete. Tell them why our mission is not complete. Yeah, tell them why we're staying in space. Because we don't know how to get down. Oh Joe, Dick. Which button do you push? Well, certainly isn't the cute little red one. Hey Joe, if I did a barrel roll to final, would that work? Be grateful that you don't have to tune in tomorrow for Pigs in Space.

Hey, that was okay, Jim.

Yeah, that was mighty fine, wasn't it? We got about a minute and a half left on this pass.

Sounded like an awful lot of good familiar talent in on that one.

And I think you probably res- recognize the music by our own contraband back here.

You bet we did. Yeah, hack and we miss those guys.

Columbia Houston through Botswana, three and a half minutes over.

Okay, Houston, read you loud and clear. The doors are closed, and uh we're in the bubbles one and two on page 3-27.

Uh Roger, we copy that. Uh gee, you guys are ahead of the timeline. That's super.

Columbia Houston, with you through Ascension for five minutes, configure AOS over.

Okay, Houston, uh we thought maybe we were a little late coming to AOS. We have started the maneuver to the burnout attitude. Just now started it, Rick.

Okay, superb uh Joe Henry. One thing we wanted to ask you is uh whether while you were in Ops 2 you selected uh runway 15 on the alternate slot over.

Affirmative. We sure did.

Okay, thank you, Richard. Uh one item of interest, we did run the uh current winds and uh the evaluation is such that were if you were to remain in Auto on the hack that would result in about 1.9 G's.

Okay, thank you, Rick. Uh we'll cut it a little early then.

Okay, and we've got uh vectors uh to send up to you and once we tell you they're up, we'll probably ask you to reload the targets.

Sounds good.

Rick, the APU fuel tank valves are open, if you would like to check them. We got three grades.

Okay, the APU's look good to us.

Okay, Rick. And if you're ready, I'll do a gimbal check while you're looking.

Okay, go ahead.

Okay, secondaries are walking.

Roger.

The vector is on board in both the pass and the BFS and at your convenience we'd like you to reload the targets.

Okay, we'll do that.

Columbia Houston, we have a go for the deorbit burn. Three minutes remaining in this pass.

Super, thank you, Rick.

Columbia Houston through Yargedy over.

Okay, Houston, read you loud and clear and the burn was good.

Okay, that's super, Joe. Uh one change to the plan, John's last weather flight indicated that our crosswind might be a little bit high, so we're going to ask you to uh reselect runway 23, your prime runway, and we'll make a landing on 23 over.

Faded out. I understand uh you want us to retarget to runway 23.

That's affirmative, runway 23 over.

And, Columbia Houston, five minutes remaining in the pass, how do you read over?

Okay, read you loud and clear now Rick. You did fade out, understand uh you want us to retarget to 23.

That's affirmative. The uh surface winds were uh a little bit too much for the crosswind. Uh one in one uh note on that, the uh evaluation of the auto maneuver around the hack would result in a 1.6 G turn. However, we're still uh recommending a CSS on the hack, uh probably slightly inside the hack. Right now, your go for maneuvers. Uh we have not ruled out auto land, and we'd like you to check your biomed harnesses over.

We'll do it.

Houston, just as a matter of clarification, we see as the only requirement is to select your primary runway on the spec in order to set up your guidance for 2-3, over.

Roger that, Rick, well done.

Columbia, Houston, the roll reversals will still be as briefed. There will be no significant effect on that early turn on the first roll reversal, over.

Roger, understand, thanks, Rick.

We are two minutes 39 seconds away from acquisition.

We sometimes get S-band radar contact prior to AOS, so we'll stand by for first contact.

We have a single S-band radar contact, shows Columbia at 188,000 feet, range of 653 miles and velocity of about Mach 15.

We do not yet have telemetry and won't for another minute or so. We're a minute and a half away from voice contact.

The radar shows the Columbia now at coming out of 173,000 feet, at a range of 542 miles, Mach 12.8.

Telemetry coming in now.

Chase, this is Houston, standby for a mark at 12.
Standby.
Mark.

Chase copy.

APUs look good and energy is nominal.

Navigational systems look good.

We're about 25 miles south of the nominal ground track.

Columbia, Houston, through buckhorn, configure AOS. You're about 25 miles south of ground track. Your nav is good, your energy is good. We'd like you to check your TACAN, MLS and radar altimeters on, over.

Okay, Rick, good to hear you, and we're showing 10.5 Mach and 165,000 feet now.

Okay, we concur with that, Joe. And did you get my call on the nav aids?

Okay, we got the call on the nav aids.

Roger, everything's looking good, your energy is very good, the nav is good, out of 154,000 at 9.8.

Roger, Rick.

Delta azimuth is 15 degrees.

Roger.

Range now 350.

Roger, and we've just got the reversal.

Roger.

Roll reversal is part of the energy management.

And Rick, the maneuvers have been going very good. The bird is real solid, good solid bird all the way.

Well, we love hearing it.

And we requested GNC I/O reset to bring the MLS into the software, over.

Welcome.

Out of 143,000 feet now.

Roger.

He's calling out program test inputs, those the ones keyed through the computer.

Okay, back to auto, PTI 2 is selected.

Roger.

Mach 7.4.

Columbia Houston, you go for TACANs.

Roger, Rick, we can turn up for the beam.

Roger.

Tactical Air Navigation information now being fed in.

Roger, Dick.

This should help bring Columbia under the nominal ground track shortly.

Not yet across the coastline still out.

Mach 6.5, range 200 miles, coming out of 125,000, crossing the coast about now, beginning to converge onto the nominal ground track.

Okay, Houston, PTI 2 at Mach 5.8, mark.

Roger, we show you now out of 120,000 feet, 5.6 Mach.

Okay, I'm configuring the fly to vaps.

Roger.

Columbia down over the San Joaquin Valley now, 9 minutes away from landing.
115,000 feet, Mach 5.3, range 148 miles.

110,000 feet.

Roger.

Left roll reversal now at 108,000, range 125 miles, Mach 4.5.

PTI 2, mark.

Roger.
I know that was PTI 3, Rick. Sorry about that.
Roger.
That was the take on and that was completed by 405.

Okay, we concur.

Speed brake coming in now.

102,000 feet altitude, range 96.

Edwards has visual acquisition on TV.
out of 100,000 feet, Mach 3.6, you have positive seats.

Uh, Rick, you're a little garbled there if you could say it again, the parts are coming out now at 3.4 and say again your last.
Positive seats.

I see seats, Columbia now with PTI 4, mark.

Roger.

90,000 feet, at a range of 74 miles.

Mach 2.9.

Columbia, Houston, your air data looks good on board.

Roger, we're looking at it.

Columbia, Houston, you can take the air data.

Welcome.

82,000 feet, Mach 2.5, range 57 miles.

And Houston, uh, PTI 5, mark.

Roger.

Everything's looking right on the money there, Joe. And we have a wind update for you and a weather update. You've got a very thin layer at 25,000. The winds airborne are as briefed and on the ground 220 18 knots, gusting to 24. Altimeter is 30 decimal 07. You got 60 miles vis underneath, over.

Hey, good, sounds like a good old Eddy day.

Yes, sir.

Out of 68,000.

39 miles range, Mach 1.5.

Okay, PTI 6, mark.

Showing you continuing to fly the test maneuvers.

60,000 feet.
Columbia, Houston, at your convenience, transfer the state vector from the past to the BFS.

They're almost done readable, Rick, say again please.

Roger, a state vector transfer, pass to BFS.

Okay. Thank you very much.

PTI 7, mark.

50,000 feet, Mach 1.

Range 27 miles.

PTI 8, mark.

Roger, you're tracking right down the line.

Columbia approaching the heading alignment circle now.

42,000 feet, Mach 0.8, 22 miles range.

Columbia, Houston, we show you intercepting the hack and a reminder, you've got the strong winds out of the west, now out of 38,000 feet.

Okay, thank you, Rick.

And we got a little bit of PTI 0 in but not too much.

Roger.

Columbia making a wide sweeping turn now to get lined up with the runway.
Good television picture.
25,000 feet.

Columbia, Houston, about 3,000 feet low now out of 24,000 feet.
Roger that.
And Chase, we're showing 290 at 20,000.

Okay, we're about to be with you in 19.
Check, body flap to manual.

Roger, body flap to manual.

280 knots at 18,000 feet.

Okay, speed brake, sleep start.
Now.

Roger, still just slightly low on the energy, looking okay.

9 miles range at 13,000.

Roger, slightly below glide slope.

You're below the glide slope, you have a Gopher auto land.

Okay, Rick, thank you, sir.

Okay, Rick, we are on auto.

Roger.

9,230.

Check speed brake auto.

Okay, speed brake, body flap, auto, everything's all. Thank you.

About a minute away from touchdown.

220.
3,500 feet.
250 knots.
The 2500 feet, speed breaks are closed. We're at 270 knots.
Chase concurs.

Okay, Columbia's clear landing. That 2 3, 1 2 1 0 and eight.

Okay.
Gears coming.
3 down.
100.
50.
30.
20.
10.
5.
3.
Touchdown.
Nose gear 15.

10.
10.
5.
3.
Touchdown. Welcome home.

Thank you, Chase.

This is Shuttle Control. The unofficial touchdown time and mission elapsed time is 2 days, 6 hours, 13 minutes, 10 seconds.

Repeat that mission elapsed time for touchdown: 2 days, 6 hours, 13 minutes, 10 seconds.
Okay, Joe, it's a great day for the Ace Moving Company. Welcome home.

Thank you.

Well, I-

Let's cut the [chuckle].

Well, I thank you all very, very much. And now I'll tell you, John said it that the Columbia is just a magnificent flying machine and it really is. It's it's a machine that we can all be proud of, and I know you know that. I think another thing you can be proud of is the team that was here at the Mission Control in Houston and gave us all the help that we had for the last three days and made the thing go so smoothly and helped us overcome some of the problems that we had and get back in such good shape. Uh, it really true. This country can be awful proud of that machine that that this country has built. It's a tremendous resource, but they also can be very proud of the talent that's right here in Houston and and um makes this whole thing possible and makes it possible to overcome problems when they come up like that. I've seen an awful lot of familiar faces that are part of that team I'm talking about. So I think it's time to give yourselves a hand here, and everybody here know that it's the people here that make this thing work and make it turn out like it is. Be awful proud of them.

I guess that's the thing that I would second, Joan. We really had a lot of fun. We're glad to be home, but we're sorry we were two days early. Uh I know that a lot of you in the audience are part of our hardcore that uh was working on the ground while Joe and I were having all the fun uh flying and it really was fun. And uh if if a night like tonight isn't a really American night, I've never been to one that is. And I'm just just really pleased that uh I could have been a part of it, but I'm also pleased to come home and uh help a lot of other people get the same opportunity. We really had a lot of fun, this that orbiter is going to grow into something that this nation is really going to be proud of, and I'm proud to have been a part of

it. Joe and I really had a lot of fun doing it. Thanks so much for coming out tonight.

