T-minus one minute 30 seconds and counting. Everything going smoothly here at the Kennedy Space Center, and waiting for the beginning of the flight of STS-7.
T-minus one minute 15 seconds, and the liquid hydrogen tank is at flight pressure.

T-minus one minute, and the firing system for the sound suppression water system on the pad is armed.
T-minus 55, the hydrogen igniters under the orbiter's engines have been armed. These devices are used to ensure that hydrogen flowing through the engines, uh, does not accumulate, uh causing a small explosion and pulse or pressure pulse at engine ignition.

T-minus 35 seconds. We're just a few seconds away from switching command to the onboard computers.
We've gone for auto sequence start.
T-minus 25 seconds and counting. The sequencers on board now controlling the final seconds.

T-minus 17 seconds and counting. The body flap and speed brake in launch position.
T-minus 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, we go for main engine start. We have main engine start
and ignition
and liftoff, liftoff of STS-7 and America's first woman astronaut, and the shuttle has cleared the tower.

Roger roll.
Houston now controlling mission control confirms roll maneuver starting.

20 seconds. Thrust looks good.

25 seconds. Roll maneuver completed.

30 seconds. Challenger now one nautical mile in altitude, throttling engines down now to 75% as programmed.

40 seconds. Challenger now 2 and 1/2 nautical miles in altitude.

45 seconds. Challenger now 3 nautical miles in altitude.

50 seconds coming up now. On program maximum dynamic pressure on the vehicle.

55 seconds. Challenger 4 and 1/2 nautical miles in altitude. Mark 1 minute
passed through Max Q still looking good. Throttling engine spec to 104%.
Given the go at throttle up.

Challenger, Houston, you're a go at throttle up.

Mark 1 minute 25 seconds. Challenger now 11 nautical miles in altitude, 8 nautical miles downrange. Velocity now reading 3700 feet per second.

Mark 1 minute 40 seconds. Challenger now 16 nautical miles in altitude, 13 nautical miles downrange. Crippen Hauck and Company
now coming into the last traces of the Earth's atmosphere. Challenger now 19 nautical miles in altitude.

1 minute 55 seconds. Challenger 21 nautical miles in altitude, 21 nautical miles downrange, standing by now for solid rocket booster separation.

Roger set.

12 minutes 12 seconds. Confirmed good solid rocket booster separation. The booster's falling away now.

2 minutes 20 seconds. Challenger, Houston, your first stage performance was nominal.

That was CapCom, Roy Bridges advising first stage performance. Onboard guidance is converging now as programmed. Challenger is now steering for a precise window in space for main engine shutdown.

2 minutes 40 seconds. Challenger 35 nautical miles in altitude, standing by now for two-engine-out capability.

Challenger, Houston, you have two-engine-out capability.

Mark 3 minutes that call out by CapCom Roy Bridges as a Challenger now has landing capability at Dakar airport should one engine go out.

Mark 3 minutes 10 seconds. Challenger's three main engines continue to run smoothly. Challenger's five-person crew really moving out now. Velocity now reading 7200 feet per second.

3 minutes 25 seconds, Challenger
45 nautical miles in altitude, a return status check in mission control by flight director Jay Greene.

3 minutes 35 seconds, crew aboard Challenger given a go to continue.

3 minutes 40 seconds, Challenger 48 nautical miles in altitude, 105 nautical miles downrange.

Standing by now for negative return call up by CapCom Roy Bridges.

Challenger, Houston, negative return.

Roger, negative return.

4 minutes 10 seconds, the flash evaporator has been activated to provide cooling for Challenger.

Mark 4 minutes 20 seconds, Challenger now 54 nautical miles in altitude, 155 nautical miles downrange, velocity now reading 9500 feet per second.

Mark 4 minutes 35 seconds. Challenger 55 nautical miles in altitude, 174 nautical miles downrange, velocity now reading 10,000 feet per second.

4 minutes 50 seconds. Challenger 56 nautical miles in altitude, 196 nautical miles downrange.

Mark 5 minutes. Standing by now for Press to MECO.

Challenger, Houston, Press to MECO.

That sounds great, Grip.
The Press to MECO call says, should Challenger lose one engine, uh, press on, keep flying forward. Challenger's engines have enough energy to achieve normal altitude and velocity at cutoff.

5 minutes 30 seconds. Challenger 58 nautical miles in altitude, 216 nautical miles downrange. Velocity now reading 13,000 feet per second.

5 minutes 42 seconds, standing by now for single-engine-out capability.

Challenger, Houston, you have single-engine-out capability.

6 minutes 4 seconds. That report from CapCom Bridges indicates if a two-engine failure occurred, the crew aboard Challenger is capable of emergency landing at Dakar airport.

6 minutes 15 seconds. Challenger 59 nautical miles in altitude, 350 nautical miles downrange. Velocity now reading 15,300 feet per second.

Mark 6 minutes 30 seconds, Challenger now 58 nautical miles in altitude. Challenger pitching over now, diving to increase velocity level off altitude, giving Challenger the best attitude.

6 minutes 45 seconds. Challenger 58 nautical miles in altitude, 422 nautical miles downrange.

7 minutes. Standing by now for single-engine Press to MECO.

Challenger, Houston, single-engine Press to MECO.

7 minutes 20 seconds. Our report says Crippen and Hauck can achieve normal engine cutoff targets even if two engines go out.

7 minutes 30 seconds. G-forces building now for Crippen, Hauck, Ride, Fabian, Thagard, coming up to 3Gs. Challenger now 58 nautical miles in altitude, 570 nautical miles downrange, velocity now reading 22,000 feet per second.

7 minutes 50 seconds.
Uh, Flight Dynamics reports, uh, velocity 23,000 feet per second. Challenger's three main engines slowly being throttled back now to accommodate the G-forces before main engine cutoff.

Mark 8 minutes 10 seconds. Challenger 59 nautical miles in altitude, 690 nautical miles downrange.

Standing by now for main engine cutoff.

Roger, Miko. Up, uh, we are about 25680, looks like and up the two-eight.

Roger, Miko.

8 minutes 32 seconds. Confirm shutdown. Uh Challenger has delivered to space the largest human payload in the history of mankind, four men, one woman.

Roger, SEP.

8 minutes 44 seconds. Confirm external tank separation.

8 minutes 50 seconds. Challenger now performing an evasive maneuver, moving below and beyond the external tank.

Go, no go status check in mission control by flight director Jay Greene, uh, for the first OMS burn and shutting down the auxiliary power units.

Challenger, Houston, your go for a nominal OMS-1, APU shutdown on time.

That was CapCom uh Roy Bridges, uh giving the go for a nominal uh OMS-1 burn.

9 minutes 25 seconds.

9 minutes 30 seconds, Challenger now maneuvering to OMS-1 burn attitude. Using the two 6,000 pound thrust engines, OMS-1 will be posigrade, moving Challenger uh forward and higher on our flight path.

9 minutes 50 seconds. Challenger now 1100 nautical miles downrange.

Houston, you guys still with us?

That's a firm. We got about 30 seconds, Grip.

Okay. It looks like you getting a street good bit of this. We got a nice frame going.

Okay, that's a good news. We've had a momentary data drop out here. And your 20 seconds, LOS. Configure LOS. We'll see you at the car at 17.

Okay, uh, we'll see you there.

Roger. Houston, anything for us, Roy?

And Challenger, Houston, uh, nothing right now.

Okay. For your information, uh, the ride was nice and smooth. Uh, maybe a smoother ride up there but took a little bit on the Columbia. We did uh notice a few fine particles coming off. I didn't notice anything of uh any size. We've uh ended up with a a few streaks on the, um, on windows W3 and uh W4 well, I guess a little bit all the way around. Uh, maybe W1 and W6 a little bit less than anything, but uh no big ditties uh, but they did occur during Ascent. Norm says that he could see quite a bit uh coming by his window down there on the uh mid-deck. Also uh very fine stuff.

Okay, we copy.

We're all netted into Disneyland.

Affirmative.

That was definitely an E-ticket.

Roger that, Sally.

Challenger, Houston, with you at Hawaii for seven and a half minutes.

Hey, Houston, good to hear from you. We just put uh the anic on M-panel power and she's looking real good.

Roger, copy.

An ex-spin table, 50 RPM.
Challenger, Houston, we like you to put the TV power to command, please.

Okay, can say.

Thank you, Sally.

Challenger, Houston, we're seeing some nice pictures there of the PAM spinning.

Roger that. Glad you hear it.

And, uh, Houston Cripp report, that the sunshield bounced just a little bit as it opened up, but uh it never stopped its uh its motion, uh during the opening.

We copy that, John. Thank you, and we're getting some good pictures of you right now.

Challenger, Houston, got a good picture of Norm and Sally now.

Roger that. Roger that.

Okay, Houston, things are looking good on board.

Roger, we copy, and you all look good, does, too.

Okay, you guys got about another five minutes here to white.

Roger, and we'll have you for about two more.

We got a nice view for white.

Roger, we understand, we saw some good views of the Earth, uh through your cameras as well as yourself.

Better from this perspective.
Challenger, Houston. We're at 30 seconds to LOS. Have a good deploy and a good burn, and we'll talk to you at Santiago just after the burn.
Roger that.
This is mission control, Houston. Television playback underway of the uh pre-deploy pass over Hawaii with the uh anic uh spin table tooling along at about 50 revolutions per minute.
We're about 13 seconds away from re-acquisition of Challenger through Santiago, Chile.
At which time we should get a verbal report from the crew on uh deployment of the anic.
Separation burn is complete at this time, also, as they first came into acquisition.
Challenger, Houston with you at Santiago. We just got the end of the burn there.
Roger that, just completed, looking good. Had but the residuals of about 7/10 in X as fast.
Roger, copy 7/10 in X.
Yeah, Houston. We'll give you your your post-burn report when you put
The last was cut out, John, but we're ready for the burn report, the uh report.
And we're also going to give them a check for capacity.
Roger, we see that.
Okay. Uh used that. Premier for you advertised, we really did deliver. Anic uh was deployed on time.
With the current attitudes of 162.23, 71.33, 294.2.
The rates plus 0.004, negative 0.001, negative 0.003. There were no anomalies during the deploy sequence.
Roger, we copy. Sounds great.
So it makes the Orbiter three for three on PAM deploys.
Roger that.
we just crossing over the golf, didn't we, John?
That's affirmative, you're over the golf now.
Yeah, we just started our payload recorder and turn around the VTR for the checklist.
We copy.
Okay, mechanical sequence is about to start.
We copy.
Okay, we're showing mechanical sequence has started.
And we've got two sun shield motors enabled at this time.
We copy.
Showing good current, 0.2 uh amps on both motors.
And clip report that it's coming open now.
And we're showing open talkbacks and disable on the motors. We're driving on the restraint on the starboard side now.
We copy.
And nominal amps, 0.2 on each motor.
Copy and we got a good picture.
Okay, the starboard restraint is out and we're driving on the port one and 2/10 of an amp on each of the two motors.
We copy.
Hey, the port restraint's out and we should see the fan here momentarily.
We see your spinning up now. We could use a little focus maybe on camera delta.
Yeah, we'll try that. We're showing 30 amps on each of the two motors.
That looks a lot better.
Okay, the setup is complete. It's 51 uh RPM on each side and the amps are dropping.
Looks good, John.
Okay, Houston, uh, Palapa is on internal power. We have uh no discrepancies and it looks completely normal power up.
Sounds good, John. It looks good to us.
This is mission control. Payload's officer reports that the Palapa is go for deployment.
Go ahead.
One thing that uh appears to be a little different than uh yesterday and uh different than reported on STS-5 uh with the Palapa, there appears to be a very, very slight uh oscillatory vibration in the vehicle.
We copy.
Now that oscillation is in the or or in the uh yeah.
We copy, and you're starting to fade.
And this was slight before full CDR. That means we can feel it.
We copy.
We rookies are real sensitive to that stuff.
And we just lost TV. We'll be with you uh through Bermuda for about another two minutes.
Roger that.
And all systems look good from here.
Real good.
About 30 seconds uh to an LOS here, Bermuda. Have a good one. We'll see you down at Ascension at 2:04.
Roger that. We'll talk to you then.
Mission control, Houston. We are at three minutes prior to the deployment of the satellite, and at this point in the terminal sequence, the mission specialists uh Ride and Fabian are checking all the various other factors that uh have to be set properly just before the ejection of the satellite and its payload assist module from the cargo bay.
That satellite is ejected uh by springs connected to the uh uh to the underside uh at deployment. There are uh clamps which are released uh by pyrotechnics, and then uh the spring ejects the uh spinning satellite and its payload assist module from the cargo bay.
Challenger, we're back with you at Ascension for eight minutes.
Roger, wait one.
Okay, we've got you John and we had a good deploy and the sun shield's closing now. We'll be with you in a minute.
That's great, Sally.
And Challenger from Houston, we're about two minutes to LOS here to Ascension. We'd like to thank you very much again for the super day. The Granite team will be handing over to the Indigo team.
Okay, you guys and not really as hard as you need with him fine. Thank you very much.
Goodnight, Crib.
Goodnight, Rick.
Hey John, we just got the Wild Canisters changed, so it looks like we're almost ready for bed.
Right, guys.
Goodnight.
Goodnight, Rick.
Goodnight.
Goodnight, Norm.
Goodnight, Sally.
Goodnight.
Goodnight, John Boy.
Goodnight, Donna.
Goodnight to Mrs. Calabash, wherever you are.
Who was that mask man?
We're seeing some good video right now.
Okay, you can have Charlie join a look at the antenna now. I think it'd be better for you. We'll put it on the down link.
Okay, Crick.
And we are seeing a good picture of the antenna right now.
That's a nice roll.
I running loose ramp.
And we're seeing a good search pattern out there right now, Challenger.
And uh Charlie, reading. Read me out. I was just saying that uh what you're looking at there with the camera, we can also look at on one of our displays so that we can see the other side of it.
Get a pretty good visual on the uh on the antenna from up here as well.
Okay, we copy that.
And Challenger, uh we just like to know uh if y'all had any trouble getting the panel back after you cleaned the IMU filter. And uh for your information the Delta P has improved slightly.
Well, that's good to know that our efforts were worthwhile and the answer is no uh we just finished putting the panel back up and it was easy to do.
Okay, Sally. ECOM says good show.
Looks like Doctor Face is putting the in there through its paces there.
And we're seeing another beautiful roll maneuver.
And John, I just used a couple of our 70 millimeter uh films to take the one I hope for a couple of very good shots of Cal.
Roger, copy that, John.
And Challenger uh it appears your mass spec data is coming down good. So good show.
Okay, that's fantastic, then.
And we're observing the search mode again of the antenna.
And Challenger Houston, we're going to be going LOS in 20 seconds. We'll see you at Santiago at 6 plus 53.
Roger that.
Mission control Houston, getting toward that point in the day where we often have long loss of signal periods as the orbit ground track processes westward and misses a lot of the ground stations.
We were seeing the operation of the KU band antenna that will be used to communicate with the Tracking Data Relay Satellites once those uh systems are operational.
That antenna going through its motions of pointing at the location in the sky where each of the satellites would be once the system is in operation and then going into a search procedure to lock in on the satellite's location.
The crew has about two hours remaining in their activities today.
They've spent a lot of time working with the shuttle palette satellite experiments. They were notified just uh a few moments ago during that pass that the uh data that they had uh been having some trouble with earlier on the mass spectrometer was coming down well after all.
That experiment is attached to the structure of the SPAS. Measures residual atmosphere up at the altitude at which the shuttle operates and uh also measures any contamination outgassing or particles from the space shuttle to add to our knowledge of the immediate environment of the shuttle. That's important for some payload customers of the space shuttle.
At two days, six hours, 35 minutes mission elapsed time, this is mission control, Houston.
And Mary. A question. Another question.
Go ahead.
For breakfast, um we only appreciate the support crew's help and we got and we had the fresh juice and so on. But looking forward to dinner, we were wondering uh where they put the limes.
And this liquid salt is a uh is a little hard to use, but we've made do.

Roger that, I think they stowed the limes next to the tonic.

All right.

And uh, Crip, if you have any general comments to give us on anything that's different from uh 10-2 compared to 14-7, we would be interested.

I really don't think that there is any difference.

From our standpoint.

From a physical comfort or anything like that.

I had a little couple little problems last night trying to get it get it set up, but uh we managed to get it set up okay for sleep, and uh we did that adjustment prior to sleep for this morning, and all that seemed to work out pretty well.

Okay. Yeah, that's what the data on the ground show. We thank you very much.

Yes, sir.

Challenger, Houston, we're going LOS in 30 seconds. We'll see you at Ascension at 3+59.

Roger that.

This is Mission Control, Houston, loss of signal at Buckhorn, final stateside pass of the day.

Midway through Orbit 51.

STS-7 commander Bob Crippen reported that there's no difference either in comfort or in operations in keeping the cabin pressure down at 10.2 PSI, and uh, the standard 14.7, which they'll return to in the next hour.

10.2 is uh equivalent uh, to about 11,200 ft altitude on Earth, somewhat above the timber line in the Rockies.

However, the uh, percentage of oxygen is somewhat higher in the cabin than it is at uh, that altitude on Earth.

Next station, Ascension in 23 minutes.

Day 3, 3 hours 35 minutes, Mission Control, Houston.

And Challenger, your go for release.

Standing.

Adequate reading.

And, uh, TJ, we just turned on the Mass Spec to, to warm it up. I, uh, assume that you wanted us to do that.

Well, affirmative, Sally, thank you.

And, Sally, we saw a power cycle on the Mass Spec, um, was there a problem with it?

I power cycle the power TJ and I'll talk to you later after the release.

And the answer was there is no problem.

Yargidity's next on 1+47.

Copy that then, we're just about to release.

Roger, you might check a camera over temp uh when you get a minute.

Roger.

And thanks.

Shuttle Mission Control, at uh 3 days, 20 hours, 34 minutes. We're about half a minute away of uh from acquisition of signal through Yargidity. We have a voice for a little over 8 minutes uh during this pass, and uh and we are uh awaiting affirmation from the crew that uh the shuttle pallet satellite has been deployed, which will be a rather a significant moment in the history of the shuttle program with it uh representing the first deployment of an object uh using the uh payload deployment and retrieval system.

So, we'll have voice in just a moment.

Challenger, Houston, through Yargidity for 8 minutes.

Okay, TJ, we're with you, and uh, John performed a beautiful release and recapture in auto.

Wonderful, wonderful.

And the Mass Spec has been initiated. It's in program 5, and we're showing F6 for the status.

Very good, Sally, thank you, and we're working on a go for the R-bar separation, but we need the processor temp, uh if you could give that to us, that would help.

Okay, I'll get that for you right now.

Hey, it's 99.4.

We copy.

TJ, for the RMS folks, you can tell them that the tip-off rates are negligible, underlined, negligible.

That's outstanding, John. Thank you.

And, TJ, the Mouse 2 was activated at uh 3 days, 20 hours, 36 minutes.

We copy.

Indian Ocean for 2 and 1/2.

Roger.

Roger that. Uh, we are stable at 1,000 ft, and uh on the V-bar, and it looks real nice. The Spas is uh performing like a real champ, and uh the attitude control system is holding up real well, no problems at all and uh gee, it just really looks super up here.

Thank you, sir.

It's John, we have had uh one more of those intermittent dropouts, but uh the Spas came right back up, and uh no other problems.

We think that's due to the auto uh antenna switching from lower to upper.

We sure do uh want to pass on uh our best wishes to those folks from MBB who built this spacecraft. It's a real beauty.

We'll do that.

Also the one we're flying in is a real beauty, too. The uh orbiter is really handling like a champ, as uh John Young would say.

We copy that.

Are you back with us now?

Yes, sir.

Are you getting TV?

And uh, John, the radar test number 2 was successful.

We copy and we still need about 10 or 20 more seconds on before the TV.

Okay, 10 or 20 more seconds.

Hey, we got it.

Okay, we thought you were getting it earlier. We're rewinding a little bit here.

Thank you.

Okay, John, you should be getting it now.

Beautiful.

John, you copy uh that uh we had a good radar uh test number 2?

Yes sir, we copied that.

Wow, well, I wanted to do it here in the dark, but uh from an evaluation, I I could not get the Spas right now. Didn't have those lights on it. They sure are nice.

And, John, uh the these pictures were taken um out of the thousand feet.

That's beautiful.

Another space first.

Challenger, the Granite team with you now for 7 minutes.

Howdy, guy. Welcome aboard to the Granite.

Thank you, we watched your show this morning, it was super.

That's what you got up early too.

Roger that. A bunch of folks that you were congratulating earlier went out to watch it fly by this morning, and they said the folks that had binoculars could actually make out the two little white dots up there.

That is the Shuttle and the Spas being the two white dots.

Well, it was certainly bright enough.

And, Crip, we're ready for TV now.

Okay.

What we have here is uh from Camera B, the one back in the aft on the uh port side of the vehicle looking forward and it shows the end of the RMS sticking up and uh this is the Spas looking down at the orbiter. You can see the uh starboard payload bay door open as well as the uh starboard windows, and then this flashes into the RMS End-Effector Camera, which is the what we use to to the kill the final rates. Uh, we're back to looking at the the Spas approaching. Uh, then we that we use that camera to judge how fast it's coming down and to uh make sure that our rates are fairly small, which uh they were today.

And uh that little adjustment there, we're trying to get the IRIS set right since we're having to do those manually.

See, we got a very slow closure rate.

Which is the kind we like.

Roger that.

Don't move around this 200,000 lb vehicle very fast. We're back to the End-Effector camera, looking for the Spas to come in. It should come in from the bottom when it does. Since the camera is on the actually on the bottom side of the RMS.

You see the limb of the earth there over on the uh left side of your picture. Get an idea how the camera is tilted.

But let John go over there and show me that view or watch while this so I don't get too nervous. But it's very exciting for you folks that uh watching in down there. Some of the people that have played with the rock stops in the simulator, you'll notice how how much these views do look like uh the simulators that we have.

Okay, we can see the camera from this view on sitting there on the bottom of the end effector.

Yep, sitting down right, right there.

It's a very comfortable approach. Um, with the way we planned the lighting or Dr. Moselle and Dr. He played it, uh, made it very comfortable. There, you can see the Spas starting to come in, uh, into view from the RMS, and uh that's where I start using my uh PAC to kill off the the closure rate.

Couple of uh gas canisters there that are attached to the Spas.

And you can see the the rate starts to kill, and uh, somewhere right in here. where I say to to John Fabian that you got it, and that that time he starts closing in with the with the RMS.

Okay, he's doing that now. He's grabbing the RMS in.

And, Crip, provided a real stable uh platform and I took it in uh about halfway here and uh then shifted over to uh vernier rate control, so that the final uh maneuver into the payload would be uh a little smoother than uh than we can get with a course control and then continued on in uh toward the grapple fixture itself. And the payload was in fact very stable and uh as we approach the grapple fixture with the the end effector, then uh Sally puts the the Spas into a free drift mode and Crip commands uh the orbiter into a free drift mode so that neither one is uh is firing thrusters at that time and then we continue to close in the last couple of feet with Crip looking out the overhead window to uh to assist in all of the ranging as we uh as we get in closer.

As you can see, it's uh a very smooth operation coming in. Uh, the RMS uh very easily controllable and uh the Spas itself is a very stable platform.

And after we've uh squeezed the trigger and grabbed it then uh it rigidizes itself and snugs up against the End-Effector, per se, and uh we're ready to do whatever comes next.

Great show there, John.

Guy, uh why you're thinking it over there, I want to pass some words down to you.

Okay, go ahead.

I've been told that some crews in the past uh have announced that uh we deliver. Well, from Flight 7, we pick up and deliver.

Roger that.

And, guys, say hi to the Spas people for us unless they've already gone out to celebrate.

Will do, I've got a note here and since you guys are so chitchatty, I'll read it up to you.

You read the note to us.

Okay, the Spas 01 team wants to thank the crew for their excellent performance. Although we were confident that they were able to get the Spas back, we are very happy that everything worked so well. We all hope that they had some fun with Spas 1 and it's uh coming from the Spas 1 team.

Well, I uh really appreciate the message, Guy, and uh it's been a real pleasure to deal with those folks and uh I think it's going to be a long-lasting relationship.

Roger that. I got another message from the uh National Research Council of Canada. They'd like to thank you for your outstanding performance in releasing and retrieving the orbiter's first free-flying satellite using, of course, the Canada arm.

Um Chip said it was fun. He was he was lying. It was it was hard work all the way.
Yeah, I bet.
We'd do it again just anytime. How about tomorrow?

Challenger Houston, we advised you're no-go for payload bay door closing. We got some clouds, some low clouds forming there at the Cape. We're keeping our eye on it. We're hoping it's going to blow off here.

Okay, we understand. No-go for payload door closing at this time.

That's affirmative.

We'll see you at Yarrgadee at 19+09.

19+09.

Challenger Houston with you at Yarrgadee for 6 and a half minutes and I'll have some words for you here in a minute.

Okay.

And guy, the OSTA-2 deactivation and the mouse deactivation are complete.

We copy that Sally and uh I've got some words now on our uh plan.

Okay, go ahead.

Roger, we are going to wave off this first rev. I've uh the we got some low clouds that just started forming us up on us down there uh in fog and it's for sure going to be a no-go for the our first opportunity.
We're hoping maybe the winds will uh continue to pick up and blow that stuff out of there. So, we're right now looking for a one rev late uh landing.

Okay, copy uh first opportunity possible would be one rev late.

Challenger Houston with you through the states for 20 minutes.

Okay, lab clear.

Challenger Houston, we'd like a G&C spec zero, if you would.

Okay, you've got it on CRT1.

Thanks, sir.

Challenger Houston.

Roger, go.

Roger uh the weather at KSC is getting worse instead of getting better, so it looks like we're a no-go for KSC.
So you guys can sit back and relax a little bit. We will be going into Edwards on the following orbit. We'll get all that data up to you here in a bit.
Uh KSC had a red carpet out there for you and we just like to thank them over the air for their support.

Yeah, well we uh we would like to go in there very much, but uh if the weather's bad, that's not the right thing to do and uh we understand.

Roger.

The wind has shifted on the surface to the south.
The last approach I made was to runway 23 and the surface wind was about uh 185 at 11 knots.
Uh we're about to make another approach to 15 now. I do have uh if you want them, another set of uh winds below 2,500 feet on runway 15.

All right, yes, please. Go ahead, Dick.

Okay. 500 feet, 230 at 8, 1000, 160 at 11, 1500, 120 at 9, 2000, 150 at 9, 2500, 170 at 8.

We copy those, thank you, Dick.

Uh, and uh, so everything looks good on all the runways out here, it's your call.

Okay, thank you. I don't know if you copied uh Cripp or not but he said to pass on to you that he quote expects the standard greeting at Edwards.

He can count on it.

Okay, Dick and I'll touch back base with you after Guam at about uh 6 or B uh 4:25 or 6:25 your time.

Okay, we'll be standing by.

Thanks.

This is Shuttle Control. That report was from Dick Truly and the Shuttle Training Aircraft at uh Dryden.

Television from Dryden uh has uh been showing the STA making approaches.

This is Shuttle Control. Challenger entered the sensible atmosphere at approximately 400,000 feet, uh about 2 minutes 10 seconds ago.

Clock and mission control center showing 28 minutes 37 seconds to touchdown.

Weather flight Houston.

Houston weather flight, go ahead.

Roger, any last minute updates, Dick?

Negative, everything same as before.

Okay, thank you very much. Are they targeted for 15, I'm assuming?

That's affirmative.

Okay.

This is Shuttle Control. 6 days, 2 hours, 8 minutes mission elapsed time. We'll stand by for first contact with Challenger.

Processing data from the Western Test Range.

Shows Mach 13, altitude 178,000 feet.

AOS Buckhorn.

Challenger, Houston, configure AOS.

Uh Houston, Challenger, loud and clear. Nice and smooth all the way down.

Real good, Cripp.

Been running about five to seven tenths aileron trip on the right.

Roger, we see that.

And feel usage look like it's pretty close to normal.

Roger, that.

Challenger, Houston, your energy, your ground track, your nav are nominal. Your go for PTIs.

Roger, go for PTIs, we're putting them in.

Altitude 160,000 feet at Mach 9.3 at a range to the runway of 330 miles.
Challenger being flown in the automatic mode.

Houston, Challenger. We got three tack ends locked up. They all look good.

Roger, take tack end.

Roger.

Challenger incorporating the tactical air navigation system.

Mach 8 at 149,000 feet. Range 265 miles.

Challenger Houston, did you just call?

Uh that's negative.

Roger.

Challenger out of 100 out of 138,000 feet now at Mach 6.8.

Range 210 miles.

Mach 6 at 129,000 feet and 179 nautical miles range.

Challenger approaching uh Santa Rosa and Santa Cruz Islands offshore from the California coast now.

Mach 5.4, altitude 120,000 feet.

Challenger, Houston, we see a low pressure on the GN2 tank for water spray boiler number three. We'd like you to switch controllers.

Okay, going bravo on number three.

Challenger, Houston, transfer the state vector to backup.

That's work.

Challenger approaching the coastline now between uh Ventura and Oxnard.

Mach 4, range 100 miles.

I'll say once more, what a way to come to California.

Roger that.

Coming right down the Simi Valley.

Challenger, Houston, we do not see the left probe deployed. We'd like you to cycle the switch.

Okay, I've cycled.

Roger, and uh we need you to go stow enable and then cycle the switch.

Okay, done.

Brian, we're showing uh it looks like consistent data for all four probes.

Roger.

83 is pressurized normally.

Roger.

And Bob, what do you think about the air data?

Roger, take air data.

Roger.

Bob Crippen is switched to manual flight mode now. At 77,000 feet.

Mach 2.1, range 51 miles.

He's back in automatic.

G2 it should be uh 3 or 4 minutes.

Mach 1.8 72,000 feet. Range 42 miles.

Mach 1.5 at 66,000 feet and a range of 36 nautical miles.

Challenger approaching the heading alignment circle at an altitude of 57,000 feet.

Mach 1.2, 45,000 feet, range 23 miles.

The wind at Dryden uh directly from the south at 10 knots.

Challenger's airspeed 255 knots.

Altitude 34,000 feet.

Touching the hack now. 18 miles to touchdown.

Out of 30,000 feet at 257 knots, beginning the wide, sweeping left turn around the hack.

25,000 feet, 260 knots.

20,000 feet 258 knots.

Challenger turning final now.

Right on the nominal track. Uh Flight Dynamics Officer Willis bolt reports.

On glide slope and turning toward the center line. 14,000 feet.

289 292 knots. On tack. Your energy looks good. Surface wind 180 at 10.

10,000 feet at 282 knots. On glide slope on center line.

6500 feet, 281 knots.

2900 feet, 287 knots.

Gear's coming.

And Challenger's back home. Back to Earth. Uh the unofficial touchdown time uh in mission elapsed time, 6 days, 2 hours, 24 minutes, 10 seconds. That time is unofficial.

Touchdown, Challenger is well stuck.

Roger, we see that. Uh congratulations. A great looking landing. And uh from the entry team uh got some good news. Good news is the beer is very, very cold this morning. Bad news is it's 3,000 miles away.

That's what I was afraid of.

You are very right.

