T-minus one minute and counting. The firing system for the sound suppression system on the pad is armed. T-minus 55 seconds.
The hydrogen igniters under the orbiter's engines have been armed. These devices are used to ensure that any hydrogen flowing through the engines prior to ignition does not accumulate causing a small explosion. T-minus 40 seconds.
We are just seconds away from switching command of the countdown from the ground computers to the on-board computers and the SRB development flight instrument recorders are on. And we have a go for auto sequence start.
T-minus 21 seconds and counting. The SRB nozzles are being moved through a test pattern to launch position.
T-minus 15 seconds.
13, 12, 11, 10, we are go for main engine ignition.
6
We have main engine ignition. 3, 2, 1, and solid motor ignition and lift off. Lift off of the first operational space shuttle mission with two satellites on board and the shuttle has cleared the tower.
Lower pitch program.
Roger, Roll Colombia.
Houston now controlling mission control confirms roll maneuver started.
20 seconds, thrust looks good.
26 seconds, roll maneuver completed.
30 seconds, Colombia now one nautical mile in altitude, throttling engines down to 85% as programmed.
Mark 40 seconds, Colombia now two and a half nautical miles in altitude, one nautical mile downrange.
Mark 50 seconds coming up now, and prior to maximum aerodynamic pressure on the vehicle.
55 seconds, Colombia now four and a half nautical miles in altitude.
Mark one minute, pass to Max Q, still looking good. Throttling engines back to 100%, giving a go at throttle up.
Colombia, this is Houston. You are go at throttle up.
Roger, go to throttle up.
Mark 1 minute 10 seconds, Colombia now seven nautical miles in altitude, five nautical miles downrange.
Mark 1 minute 20 seconds, Colombia now 10 nautical miles in altitude, seven nautical miles downrange.
Colombia, Houston, we are monitoring a slightly depressed trajectory expected because of the headwinds.
Roger, understand.
1 minute 35 seconds, I was CapCom Bob Stewart advising the crew a slight depression because of the headwind. Colombia moving out now as preplanned on three good engines.
1 minute 45 seconds, a brand over Myer and North Allen, now coming in the last traces of the Earth's atmosphere. Colombia now 19 nautical miles in altitude, 18 nautical miles downrange.
Mark 2 minutes, standing by now for solid rocket booster separation confirmation.
Roger, PC.
Colombia now 25 nautical miles in altitude.
2 minutes 15 seconds, confirm solid rocket booster separation.
2 minutes 22 seconds, onboard guidance is converging as programmed. Colombia is now steering for a precise window in space for main engine cutoff.
31 nautical miles in altitude, 43 nautical miles downrange.
Colombia, this is Houston. Your first stage was a low on performance this morning.
Okay, fine.
2 minutes 40
2 minutes 49 seconds, Colombia now 37 nautical miles in altitude, 58 nautical miles downrange, velocity now reading 6,500 feet per second.
Mark 3 minutes.
3 minutes 5 seconds, Colombia now, standing by for two engine tail.
Houston, you have two engine tail capability.
Two engine tail capability.
3 minutes 15 seconds, that call-up by CapCom Bob Stewart says that the Colombia now has landing capability at the car airport should one engine go out.
3 minutes 25 seconds, Colombia now 46 nautical miles in altitude, 88 nautical miles downrange.
3 minutes 32 seconds, return status check in mission control by flight director Tom Holloway.
The crew aboard Colombia, give them a go to continue. 3 minutes 40 seconds.
Colombia now 49 nautical miles in altitude, 105 nautical miles downrange.
Standing by now for negative return.
Mark, negative return.
Negative return.
3 minutes 56 seconds, with that call-up, Brand Overmeyer and Company committed to space travel. They can no longer turn around and return to launch site.
Mark 4 minutes 5 seconds, Colombia now 52 nautical miles in altitude, 132 nautical miles downrange.
Colombia now traveling at a velocity of 8,900 feet per second.
Mark 4 minutes 30 seconds, trajectory plots in mission control still on target for Colombia.
Brand, Overmeyer, Lenoir, Allen swiftly moving downrange now, now 50 or 174 nautical miles downrange.
Mark 4 minutes 50 seconds, Colombia now 57 nautical miles in altitude, 192 nautical miles downrange, velocity now reading 10,500 feet per second.
Colombia, Houston, your go at 5 minutes.
Roger, go at 5 minutes.
Mark 5 minutes 10 seconds, Colombia now 58 nautical miles in altitude, 222 nautical miles downrange.
10 minutes, or standing by for press to MICO.
Colombia, you have press to MICO capability.
Roger, press to MICO capability.
5 minutes 44 seconds of press to MICO call from CapCom Stewart says should Colombia lose but one engine, press on, keep flying forward. Colombia's engines have enough energy to achieve normal altitude and velocity at cutoff.
5 minutes 58 seconds, Colombia now 59 nautical miles in altitude, 307 nautical miles downrange, velocity now reading 13th, standing by for single engine tail.
Colombia, Houston, you have single engine tail capability.
Roger.
6 minutes 15 seconds, that report from CapCom Stewart indicates if a two-engine failure occurred, the crew aboard Colombia is capable of an emergency landing at the car airport.
Mark 6 minutes 25 seconds, Colombia now 59 nautical miles in altitude, 316 nautical miles downrange, velocity now reading 15,400 feet per second.
Mark 6 minutes 40 seconds, Colombia pitching over now, diving to increase velocity, level off altitude, giving Colombia a most favorable altitude. Colombia now 59 nautical miles in altitude.
6 minutes 55 seconds, Colombia has passed still down the middle of the displays in mission control.
Colombia now 59 nautical miles in altitude, 445 nautical miles downrange, velocity now reading 17,900 feet per second.
7 minutes 12 seconds.
7 minutes, standing by for single engine press to MICO.
Colombia, you have single engine press to MICO capability.
Copy.
3 minutes, or 7 minutes 25 seconds, that report says Brand and Overmeyer can achieve normal engine cutoff targets even if two engines go out. Colombia now 58 nautical miles in altitude, 535 nautical miles downrange.
Mark 7 minutes 40 seconds, G-force is building for Brand, Overmeyer, Lenoir, Allen now, coming up to 3 G's.
Colombia now 58 nautical miles in altitude, 584 nautical miles downrange. Colombia's three main engines slowly being throttled back now. Should be throttled at 65% at 6 seconds before main engine cutoff.
8 minutes.
Flight Dynamics Officer Ron Epps reports Colombia's velocity at 23,000 feet per second.
8 minutes 12 seconds, Colombia now 59 nautical miles in altitude, 675 nautical miles downrange, velocity now reading 24,400 feet per second.
Mark 8 minutes 25 seconds, standing by now for main engine cutoff.
You have a good MICO.
Copy, good MICO Colombia.
Confirm shutdown. Colombia now in space for the fifth time, this time with a four-man crew, standing by now for external tank separation.
Colombia now 795 nautical miles downrange.
Go no-go status check in mission control by flight director Tom Holloway for the first Oms burn and shutting down the auxiliary power units.
Confirm external tank separation.
Colombia now performing an evasive maneuver, moving below and beyond the external tank.
Colombia, this is Houston. You'll be go on a nominal Oms-1 burn, APU shutdown on time.
Nominal Oms-1 APU shutdown on time.
Mark 9 minutes 25 seconds, I was CapCom Bob Stewart advising the crew aboard Colombia, they're given a go for the first first Oms burn on time and nominal.
Mark 9 minutes 40 seconds, Colombia now 1,015 nautical miles downrange.
Mark 9 minutes 55 seconds, Colombia now maneuvering to Oms-1 burn attitude using two 6,000 pound thrust engines. Oms-1 will be posigrade, moving Colombia forward and higher on her flight path.
10 minutes 44 seconds, a prop system engineer in the control center confirms the Oms-1 burn has started to good engines.
Colombia, Houston, 30 seconds to LOS, we see two good engines burning on the Oms-1. We are observing a water spray boiler 1, uh, a problem and if it gives you a problem, just switch over to the B.
Copy that, we'll monitor the spray boiler 1. If it gives me a problem, go to B.
That's firm, 10 seconds to LOS, configure LOS. We'll talk to you at the car.
Roger, configure LOS.
Colombia, this is Houston, with you through Yargaty for 8 minutes.
Roger, Houston, loud and clear. We had good Oms 2 and we're in major mode 106, proceeding into the post-insertion checklist. We have one anomaly, which I'll give you in a minute.
Okay, we copy.
Okay, Bob, the Dips may want to hear this. CRT2 has currently failed within the CRT of the DEU. It is flashing with only the upper one quarter of the screen light it and our saying the lower one quarter of the screen is light it, and it shows the stuff that would normally be up on the upper one quarter, and it's flashing at about a 2-second rate.
It, uh, we power cycled it, and brought it back on, and and we've tried to drive it to BFS. No joy, it looks like a CRT problem, Redmont.
Okay, we copy that, Bob.
It's a little bit like your home TV having the picture slide down to the lower left corner of the tube and then start flashing at a 1 CPS rate.
That was Okay, we copy your report. I've got an advisory for you before you get into Ops 2. Uh, as soon as you go to Ops 2, you'll probably get a Cabin N2 message. That says is normal due to trap pressure, so ignore it when it comes up.
That was pilot Bob Overmeyer reporting the CR2, CRT2 problem.
And we had a good gimbal check, and both the Oms 1 and 2 were on time, and nominal burns.
Okay, Vance, copy the burns. And, be advised we got reports of two SRBs floating out there. You guys lost them on the way up, but we found them.
Good, glad to hear it.
Hope the ship got out of the way.
Must do.
Houston, Colombia.
Go ahead, Colombia.
Uh, you've got the starboard door just about always open, it's opening right on time. Tail looks beautiful.
95.
We're just pressing through right on the other side of the forward half latches on the port door opening this time.
Starboard. Yeah, I did this with a manual switch instead because I wanted to get some, I want to get some more views of those doors closing a little bit.
Okay, we copy that, Bob.
Starboard door is now opened.
Didn't really have a good view of which, uh, which relay was going to hit. Looks like they're all going to hit right on the end of the striker plate and the starboard door, port door is coming open.
The, uh, port bulkhead latches are unlatched, and that was Pilot Bob Overmeyer reporting the port door coming open.
Uh, Houston, Colombia.
Go ahead.
Okay, we have the, uh, PDI DFL/FPM loaded.
Okay, copy the PDI.
Doors are open.
How's the view?
The payload bay doors are now opened. Both starboard and port doors are opened.
Uh, Bob, it looks real neat with the doors open.
And, uh, we have some, uh, particles of lint that came out of the payload.

but it was really pretty clean.
Looks real neat.

Okay we copy that and copy to good view, but I still like to check it myself.

You'll get your chance, Bob.

Columbia, this is the White House, we have the President of the United States. Go ahead.

Hello.

Hello Mr. President.
Yeah, this is Columbia.
Yes, who is this, Vance?

Yes, sir.
All four of us are standing by here having a good time up here, sir, getting ready for a deployment.

Well, now wait until I get my hat and I'll go with you.

Listen, I just want to tell you, Vance Brand, and Robert Overmyer, William Lenoir, and Joseph Allen, how proud we all are of what you're doing, and how much our prayers are with you, for success and how everyone down here is watching and how pleased we were with the beautiful send off this morning.

You know, some time ago I had an opportunity to speak to some astronauts who were up there in one of the earlier flights of Columbia, and I asked them if when they came over Washington on their last go around, they'd pick me up and drop me off in California with them, and I'll repeat the request, they didn't do it, but, seriously, we are very proud of you, and you know how much all of us here down below are rooting for you up there.
All of America is watching you.

Well, thank you very much, sir.
It's a beautiful world that we're going over, currently over the Atlantic and we're very proud to be up here representing America.

Well, we're proud of you, and we're going to try down here to keep that world as beautiful as it as it is to you looking at it from up there.
Sometimes I I wonder just seeing some of the results of your flights, the pictures and all, I wonder if more of us could see it from that angle, we might realize that there must be a way to make it as united in reality here on Earth as it as it looks from outer space.

Over.

Yes, sir.
We're in total agreement on that one.

All right.
Well, God bless you, and best wishes to all of you, and again congratulations.

Okay, and the port restraint is out, here comes the spin.

Yeah, we see it down here, Bill.
It's beautiful.

And SBS is spinning.

Okay, Mike. We're at 52, coming back down, 51 RPM.

Roger, we copy.
You guys look good.

Just like Huntington Beach, Mike. That spin control circuit there rings about twice, and that seems to settle on down.

Roger, we copy, Bill.

All right, I'm going to activate the spacecraft.

Roger, and we're getting super TV down here.

Okay, and notice that the air is and rate's have really settled on already, Mike, on the universal pointing.

Roger, we copy, Bill.
SBS is considered is configured on ASC1 on hold for your internal power.

Roger, we copy.

Flight Director John Cox polling the positions here, go for deploy.

And Mike, you can tell Al Pennington that the PID DCOM FDA works properly here in the vehicle, but it never did in the SMS.
We got the down out as disappeared for input four.

Roger, we copy.

And Mike, if you ask for the item eight internal power, I missed it.

Okay, Bill, we just now got it, you have a go for internal power.

And you have internal power.

Roger, we see it down there.

Looks like they got a beautiful day in the Hawaiian Islands today, Mike.

Roger, we copy that.

Yeah, this window this time just gave me this beautiful view looking right down on them.

We sure got a beautiful view of the uh Halo back there, and the air flight deck.

Super.

You may find this hard to believe, Mike, but in just a minute or so, I'm going to go take my first look at it.

You're right, Bill. We find that pretty hard to believe.

And Columbia, Houston, everyone down here is go for deploy with 2 minutes left over Hawaii.

And so's everyone up here.

And Columbia, Houston with 1 minute to go over Hawaii.
Uh, Santiago AOS is 8:11:02, and we're looking forward to a good deploy report.
Everything looks right on the money to us down here right now.

Okay. We'll see you there, we're looking forward to one, too.

See you shortly, Mike.

Roger, you guys have a good one.

Thank you, Mike.

This is Mission Control Houston.
Loss of signal at Hawaii.
About 8 minutes away from when the crew of Columbia will deploy SBS.

Television picture through Hawaii showed the satellite spinning at approximately 52 revolutions per minute.

All systems aboard SBS appear to be normal at this time.

And that Santiago about 20 minutes from now, we should get a report from the crew on the deployment.

The spacecraft will be deployed about 1,200 nautical miles west of the Galapagos Islands at 109 degrees west longitude approximately, as Orbit 6 crosses the equator.

The springs that push the satellite out of the cradle are preloaded to approximately 1,400 pounds compression, and will impart about 3 feet per second velocity away from the orbiter.

Some 30 minutes after deploy, Columbia will be maneuvered in a positive grade direction of about 16 feet per second in the so-called separation maneuver, so that the orbit then will be 9 miles higher at perigee, be 160 by 169 nautical miles.

That is 15 minutes after the deploy maneuver, and then 30 minutes later, it will be above and behind the satellite by some 18 miles.

This is one of the many paradoxes of space flight where you speed up to slow down.

Being in a higher orbit, the period is longer.

Therefore, you begin to fall behind another object traveling in the original orbit.

The SBS weighs some 2,300 pounds at the time of deploy.

However, after both of the upper stages have done their thing, the weight is down to 1,300 pounds.

The perigee kick motor, which will ignite some 45 minutes after deployment, will boost the satellite up to 22,300 nautical miles at apogee.

The perigee will remain at 160 until the apogee kick motor is fired several days from now by ground command.

Columbia, Houston, with you through Santiago for 2 minutes, over.

Okay, Mike. Uh, we deliver.
We got SBS off on time, and if you're interested, I'll read you the pad.

Roger, go ahead.

Okay, current attitude 24 decimal 1987 decimal 41.

292 decimal 65.

Errors, plus 0.08 minus 0.08 minus 0.07.

Rates minus 0.001 minus 0.001 minus 0.002. Those are all roll pitch yaw in sequence.

Roger, those numbers sounds awful good there.

Did you get those, Mike?

Roger, we copied all the numbers, Bill. How do you read?

Okay, I'm reading you loud and clear now, and uh we did initially get the RF data back from the uh from the PAM, and it looks like we've got it right now.
It's been uh cycling in and out. We went ahead and disabled the uh the DCOM FDA as it was uh annoying us.

But right now, it looks good and there was a short period of time where it did go out on us, but it's back.
And we apparently got very good TV and photo documentation of it.

Over.

Roger, we're really looking forward to seeing that, Bill.

Uh Mike, we hope the TV comes out. It doesn't play back very well on our monitor, but we're relatively sure we got it.
And we, by the way, still have that beautiful satellite in sight. It's traveling just below it.

Roger, we copy, Bill, and uh Joe, and uh got a lot of happy people down here. You guys did good good work.

Columbia, Houston with you at Hawaii for 8 minutes.

Roger that, Brian. We have an item 5 plus 1 ASC 1 is enabled and the encoder is now on.
We're ready to configure.

Roger, Joe, we see that.

And Brian, camera Charlie's got the spinning PAM.

Roger, we see the TV, it looks good.

Okay, Brian, we're 13 minutes away, and we don't have a single anomaly to report. It looks beautiful to us here.

Roger, Joe, looks good to us so far, and uh we're seeing pretty good TV from the interior now as well.

How we say?

And Brian, try to look out aft over the uh top of the SBS sunshield.
You can't see the sunshield from the anik, but you can every now and then see the uh oblong side of the omni coming over the top of it.

Roger that, Bill.

This is Mission Control Houston.
Loss of signal on Orbit 22 as the spacecraft progressed toward the deployment of the Anik satellite in some 6 minutes.

Television picture from the spacecraft showed the Anik spinning up at about 50 RPM.

And we'll have confirmation on deploy at the Santiago station in some 18 minutes, the voice relay station.

And on the next orbit, over Hawaii, some of the videotape recorded on board will be dumped at that time showing actual deployment.

At 7 hours 59 minutes, Mission Control, Houston.

Mission Control Houston, about 30 seconds away from acquisition at Santiago, at which station we should get a confirmation of Anik deploy.

And we're uh some 2 minutes away from ignition on the separation burn.

Columbia, Houston with you at Santiago, and standing by for your deployed report.

Okay, Houston, this is Columbia.
We are two for two, we deliver.
And uh we're standing by for a burn. How long will you be with us, Brian?

Roger, we have 5 minutes, we'll see the burn.

Okay, look at it, and then we'll give you the numbers. We're going to try to to record this on film.

Okay, Joe.

Actually, Brian, we have enough time.

I'll give you the numbers in the same order Bill did, as follows: negative 0 3 negative 1 0 negative 0 4, and they're all preceded by a decimal point.

And the rates are decimal 0 0 0 negative decimal 0 0 1, and negative decimal 0 0 3. Over.

Roger, copy, they sound real good.

And I'll give you the current ATT in a few minutes.

Roger.

Hey, Houston we we have a good uh set burn here.

Roger Vance, we see the good burn.

And uh Columbia, Houston uh words from the Anik folks.

The Anik spacecraft has been acquired over Guam right where they expected to see it.

They hope to be getting spacecraft data in the next hour, and uh the position of the spacecraft implies a nominal.

Ekm and spacecraft separation.

Outstanding. Very good news. That's great. And I'll be anxious to hear more before we lose you. Understand we can start that hot fire anytime, right?

That's affirmative.

We're trying to close that famous Joe Allen Wii hole and we deliver.

Roger that.

If you got any news, we're just sitting here trying to eat some barbecue beef. We'd be happy to listen to anything that might be of interest.

Uh Roger Bob. The big news down here is that the space shuttle successfully deployed a couple of satellites in the last couple days.

Other than that?

How are the crew relay? Any further word on the transfer orbits of those satellites?

Uh. Standby on that.

And Columbia, Houston. The apogee kick today on the SBS should come in about 10:20 Met this afternoon.

Okay. Good show.

And you'll be glad to hear the SRBs are still floating, still being towed in to port. Should arrive sometime this afternoon.

Good.

You may be interested in what I'm doing, uh Mike, yeah. You really feel like when you're eating you like to get your whole body kind of restrained, like your head and shoulders, everything. I've got my feet up on about the fourth step of the ladder and my neck jammed against the bulkhead right above the ML-31 Charlie. It makes a perfect place and I'm sitting here eating my barbecue beef with a kind of a picnic.

Okay, we copy. We'll have to take your word that that's comfortable.

It's the first time we all agree that Bob's shown restraint when he eats.

Roger. We copy that.

Hello Columbia, Houston. How do you read?

Uh Houston, this is Columbia, loud and clear.

And we've got a slight change here for you Vance. We thought we'd pass to you before you go to sleep this evening. We have had some consultations here, Mission Control and we're going to exercise some flexibility that we've built into the flight plan here for the next couple days and do your EVA on flight day five and give you some things to do on flight day four tomorrow and we worked up the plan already and we're going to pass up to you on your teleprinter review early in the morning.

We understand the EVA will be flight day five. We'll pass up our plan for tomorrow on the teleprinter.

That's affirmative. Uh basically they're it's almost a swap flight day five for flight day four with some changes, but they're going to be minor and uh there shouldn't be no problem. And since we're keeping you awake a little bit later tonight, we're going to let you sleep until 18:10 in the morning so you can make up this 40 minutes.

Okay. Uh we'll uh sleep in until 18:10.

That's affirmative and we will see you then.

Okay. Very good.

Goodnight. And we're going off. We're going off the air.

Goodnight. Sleep well. We'll see you in the morning.

And Bob, did you have any trouble with getting tape cables tangled up as you were making that one-for-one swath?

It worked fine. I I had to had to cut cut a number of tie wraps probably more than you expected, but uh that made it very free and it really wasn't any problem at all, one-for-one.

Okay. We might have to work on changing that procedure then. That sounds like a pretty good idea not to have to tag all that stuff.

I sure made it a lot faster. I guarantee you that.

And as far as I'm concerned, uh, Bob Uh Bob Omar gets a retirement a week award. We sure are glad to have those three tubes, uh, when entry time comes.

Yeah. We'll second that.

The first I've seen these guys set above me on this trip.

Columbia, Houston with you for buck horn for about uh two minutes.

Hey Houston, uh, we've got something to report to you on this EVA prep. Standby. Houston, how do you read EV1?

Read you 5x5, EV1.

Okay. We've got a problem with Joe's fan. We've got to the point where we both got helmets on. I got my fan on and up and running. Joe's fan was on and running and SCU and then it suddenly quit. And at the same time he got a light light on his uh DNC panel. We cycled the fan and came back on but dropped back offline again and we've uh looked at it on both SCU and that car, and basically it's the same way. It'll come on for a few seconds, trip off, give him a light light on the DNC panel and on the SCU power he's drawing the same voltage I am, about 19.4 and I've drawn about 4.1 or 2 amps uh steady state. When his fan comes on, the amps go to scale high for about two seconds and then they drop down to one amp. And that's where we are. We've got Joe's helmet off and I just took mine off as well and we're looking for some ideas.

Roger, we're uh we'll think about it and get back to you.

Columbia, Houston.

Go ahead.

Okay, uh Developing a plan down here, we'd like We would like to get Bill into a pre-breathe mode as soon as possible. Uh we're looking at a plan for an EMU checkout by letting Bill stay in the airlock, depress the airlock and uh open the outer hatch with no airlock egress and we're throwing that up for your comment.

Don't Don't knock it.

Okay, uh Houston, we'll get him into pre-breathe mode to do exactly as you said.

Columbia, Houston, we've got the tire data. We're ready for the uh strain gauge signal conditioners to go off.

Okay. We'll turn them off.

Okay, Bob, I'm in the suit and my Delta-P right now is 1 and I'm climbing in pressure.

Okay, Bill. We copy.

And Columbia in about 30 seconds we're going to have a 1 minute break and calm and Bob is going to come up at about uh 55.

Hey. See you at Mila.

Columbia, Houston is back with you through Mila.

Roger.

Hey Bob, how do you read the IV1?

Read you loud and clear, Bob.

Uh, Bob, and that motor circuit on the fan, is there a uh a cut out on the fan somehow on the auto circuit that uh is the thing that's misbehaving? Because the fan never fails to start and get up to speed when you hit start and then it dies after about two or three seconds at at what sounds like full speed.

We understand your question Bob. We'll get back to you in a second.

Okay, Bob. I have gone to press. My suit pressure has climbed to 3.8 on the gauge. 3.6 on the DNC panel and it seems to have leveled off there. Not 4.3.

Okay, Bill, we copy your at 3.8 and 3.6.

That's affirmative Bob, and do you want us to do a leak check here?

That's firm Bill, go for the leak check there.

I'm that okay, L2 actuator press Uh You can Columbia.

Go ahead, Columbia.

Uh, uh Bob Uh Just one more clarification on the uh hydraulic thermal conditioning, uh The next step, uh, that comes up, uh, all you want me to do is throw the radiator out temp to normal, uh and do not shut off the circ pumps. Is that correct?

That's correct, Vance.

Columbia, this is Houston, through IOS for uh, about the 9 minutes.

Roger Bob.

And Bob, for secure gear. I've gone to Joe's mini workstation and I've turned the foot restraints around. I'm going to get in them and tie the uh shark hook off here against one of the uh suit suit stands and just see how it is to move around a little.

Okay, Bill.

Hey Bob, are you still in?

Yeah, we with you for another two and a half minutes, Bill.

Okay, Bob, I'm upside down in the foot restraints facing the inner hatch and I've evaluated what I call the shark hook as a restraint by tying it off on this little handrail under the hatch. I get to be over it to you. And I'd have to confess, it works better as a central point restraint than I would have guessed. Ask the EVA guys if they can think of anything else I could look at real quick, like while I'm in here pressurized, 0G.

Okay, Bill, they're online. We'll get back to you pretty quick.

Columbia, this is Houston.

Go ahead, Bob.

Uh we've got some bad news for you. Uh we're going to have to terminate the EVA prep uh Bill's suit reg is just regulating too low for us to continue with that. But uh we would like you to do some troubleshooting. We'd like to get Joe's suit pressurized and see if Joe's regulator is working at the same level.

Okay, Bob, we copy.

They're sending our day for suits, Bob.

Uh, you know how Monday mornings are.

I guess you're right. Uh, okay, uh pressurized my suit without me in it, I assume, because it's hot in there without that fan.

That's affirmative Joe, without without a Joe in it, yes.

Okay, I catch on quick.

Does that mean you're done with me, and I ought to get out?

That's a firm, Bill.

And Columbia, the reason we're just uh wanting to pressurize Joe's suit is just to see if we've got a generic regulator problem or whether we've got a 0G problem, but we just don't know what to do about it right now.

Okay, Bob, I understand and just for drill, I'm repressurizing my suit in some blind hope.

Understand, Bill.

Columbia, this is Houston through IOS for uh about 9 minutes.

Roger, Bob.

And Bob, for securing here I've got a Joe's mini workstation and I've turned the foot restraints around. I'm going to get in them and tie the uh shark hook off here against one of the uh suit suit stands and just see how it is and move around a little.

Okay, Bill.

Hey Bob, are you still in?

Yeah, we with you for another two and a half minutes, Bill.

Okay, Bob, I'm upside down and the foot restraints, facing the inner hatch and I've evaluated what I call the shark hook as a restraint by tying it off on this little handrail under the hatch. I get to be over it to you and I'd have to confess, it works better as a central point restraint than I would have guessed. Ask the EVA guys if they can think of anything else I could look at real quick like, while I'm in here, pressurized and 0G.

Okay, Bill, they're online. We'll get back to you pretty quick.

Hey Bob, you’re talking to them. It looks like my suit is locked up in pressure at 3.7 on both the gauge and on the DCM meter.

Okay, we copy 3.7. Looks like it’s found an average, doesn't it?

Yeah.

Columbia, this is Houston. Uh, Bill, we’re fresh out of ideas down here about something you can do in there. If you’ve got some tethers with you, you might evaluate the uh the the tethers.

And the Velcro on the arms.

Yeah, okay, that’s easy though. Okay, I’ll do that. I’ve got some tethers. I’ll evaluate that. I’ll also turn this foot restraint around and just evaluate access to the outer hatch.

Okay, and we’re going LOS right now, Guam will be next at 0445.

Okay, I ought to be done a way back up by then.

This is shuttle control.

Indian Ocean Station has loss of signal. Next acquisition at Guam in 17 minutes.

Bill and Or still in the airlock. Uh While he’s there in a pressurized suit, he’s evaluating uh the foot restraints in the airlock and a mini workstation in that airlock.

He reported his uh suit seems to be regulating at an average uh 3.7, so the reduced pressure apparently has not uh uh freed up the regulator on his suit either as some had hoped.

At four days, four hours, 29 minutes mission elapsed time, this is shuttle control, Houston.

This is shuttle control at four days, four hours, 44 minutes mission elapsed time. Standing by for acquisition through Guam.

Columbia, this is Houston, with you through Guam for five minutes.

Okay, Houston, uh we got uh Bill coming out of his suit now and uh we're going to get started on other things.

This is shuttle control. We're getting data through the Western Test Range now.

Altitude’s about 183,000 feet, Mach 13.8.

Getting uh C-Band radar now.

Shows Columbia 550 miles from the runway.

Censorship act.
Show them Auto now.

And we have AOS at Buckhorn.

Chase Houston standby for Mach 12.

Flight dynamics officer reports nominal energy, nominal ground track.

Mark, Mach 12.

Altitude 172,000 feet.

Looking very good.

Range 440 miles at 167,000 feet.

Mach 11.

Columbia, Houston, with you through Buckhorn, configure AOS.

Roger, configure AOS. We're in the first roll reversal.

Roger.

And Ray, we had an AC overload, nothing else on the uh sub, looks like at that overload center.

Roger Bob, and uh we’ve checked and your AC systems are all good.

Okay.

Columbia is at Mach 9 at 154,000 feet, range 331 miles.

Everything looking good.

142,000 feet now.

Mach 7.7 range.

Range 250 miles.

Columbia is trace on the uh forward chart right on the ground track predicted.

Mach 6.7 at 130,000 feet, range 210.

How the TACAN looking, Houston?

Columbia, Houston, take TACAN.

Roger.

The tactical air navigation system now being incorporated in Columbia.

Mach 5.6 at 121,000 feet.

Range 163 miles.

Crew conducting the program test inputs.

The aerodynamic tests uh on re-entry.

Small uh maneuvers and changes in altitude.

Mach 4.8 at 111,000 feet.

Range 130 miles.

Columbia is approaching the coast now.

Ground track, oh,
Ground track will cross the California Coast south of Santa Barbara, very near uh the town of Carpinteria.

Mach 4 and Columbia should be crossing the coastline right about now.

Range is 100 miles.

Altitude 100,000 feet.

This ground track very near the track that the STS-4 flew.

Columbia will uh pass over the Condor sanctuary, and over the town of Fairmont.

Rosemond Dry Lake before going into uh the turn to the runway.

Houston air data looks good on board.

Columbia, Houston, take take air data.

Mach 2.8 at 87,000 feet with a range of 67 miles.

Columbia is still right on the predicted ground track.

Right on energy.

Columbia is two times the speed of sound now at 74,000 feet.

Range 48 miles.

Everything still looking very good at Mach 1.7 70,000 feet.

Columbia, Houston, request vector transfer to backup, and uh altimeter 2995.

Okay, we'll change altimeter.

And vector transfer.

Roger, and the uh surface wind is calm.

Roger, calm surface wind.

Mach 1 now.

At 51,000 feet, range 27 miles.

Columbia's subsonic now at Mach .9.

At 46,000 feet and a range of 25 miles.

Control stick steering now.

38,000 feet.

Mach .8, range 20 miles.

Standing Chase plane has uh video of Columbia.

On the monitors in the news center now.

Altitudes 28,000 feet.
 Chase to standard bar.

Holding 1.6 Gs on the heading alignment circle.

At 22,000 feet uh the air speed at 275 knots.

Range is 11 miles.

Columbia, Houston, you're looking real good on the hack.

Roger.

Out of 18,000 feet now, an air speed of 260 knots.

Going through a cloud deck.

110 that's right now, Ray.

14,000 feet.
 Okay, we show you right on the glide slope.

This shot from ground cameras now on the monitors in the news center.

Right on the glide slope.

9,000 feet.

281 knots.

5,000 feet.

2,800 feet.

289 knots.

Gear down.

We show the gear locked now.

Unofficial touchdown time was 5 days, 2 hours, 14 minutes, 25 seconds.

That unofficial touchdown time again uh 5 days, 2 hours, 14 minutes, 25 seconds.

Columbia performing a maximum braking test on this landing.

Hey uh Roy, are we down now? That was uh Are we on the ground?

Absolutely, it was beautiful, and you certainly lived up to your motto this flight. Welcome home.

Yes, sir. We deliver.

We delivered. Nice to be back.

Lot of applause in the room here and we're very happy to have all you guys home again.

Nice to be back.

Time 101, wheels to stop.

All right. Copy uh Columbia. Thank you.

As Vance and Bob and Joe have said, we've just come back from a tremendous experience. We enjoyed it very much, but nonetheless, it's great to be on this side of the clouds again.

It's a little cooler here than we expected.

We uh seriously, we did have uh a good time. We tried to share with you some of the fun. We may have overdone it a little bit. I understand we're all charged 5 days annual leave.

For for most of the uh the photography and the TV that you saw, we have Joe Allen to thank. The only warning I have for you is if he offers to show you his slides from his vacation, be careful.

In all seriousness though, we feel that uh we've been very honored and we we need to thank you each and every one of you for allowing us to stand on your shoulders while we did this mission and we hope that you can have the same feelings that we have that 10 years from now, when that good old orbiter is still delivering payloads to orbit, that we can all feel, rightly proud, I think, that we were here and we helped get it started. And I think that's a tremendous accomplishment for us, JSC, NASA, and the nation and I hope that everybody really does deep in his own heart feel very much a part of that. There's far too many people here to to mention people by name but there is one I would like to mention and that's the center director that got us to this point that brought the orbiter up to the right to the verge of being operational and retired recently. Chris Craft, we think you did a tremendous job.

And thank you all for coming out in this weather.

