The 61-B launch countdown is on schedule and proceeding smoothly toward a launch today at 7:29 PM Eastern Standard Time.
This will be the second night launch in the history of the space transportation system.
Brewster Shaw is the commander for this mission, and he will be making his second trip into space today.
Bryan O'Connor is the pilot, who will be making his first space trip.
Mission specialists Jerry Ross, Woody Spring, and Mary Cleave, will all be making their first shuttle flight along with Mexican payload specialist, Rodolfo Neri Vela.
Payload specialist Charlie Walker of McDonnell Douglas Corporation, will be making his third trip today.
This mission will last for seven days, and three satellites will be deployed: the Morelos, AUSSAT, and SATCOM satellites.
This mission will also feature two space walks, in which the astronauts will be testing concepts for erecting structures in space.

And have a nice flight, guys.
Thanks, very much.
T-minus 10, 9, 8, we have a go for main engine start. We have main engine start, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0, and we have lift-off.
For the safe shuttle and it has cleared the tower.
Roll program.
Roll program initiated.
Roger roll, Atlantis.
Good roll confirmed.
Beginning throttle down to 65%.
Main engines now at the 65% throttles.
Velocity 2,400 feet per second.
Altitude 5.8 nautical miles, downrange distance 4 nautical miles.
Engines throttling back up to 104%.
Go at throttle up, Atlantis.
Ground clear, 468 Max.
15 seconds away from solid rocket booster separation. Velocity 5,000 feet per second. Altitude 19 nautical miles, downrange distance 20 nautical miles.
PC less than 50, Houston.
Roger.
And we have solid rocket booster separation. 2 minutes 6 seconds.
Atlantis, Houston, performance nominal.
Roger, nominal performance, nice smooth ride, tread.
Roger.
Velocity 8,000 feet per second. Standing by for negative return.
Atlantis, Houston, negative return.
Roger, negative return.
4 minutes 55 seconds, velocity 10,400 feet per second, altitude 54 nautical miles, downrange distance 204 nautical miles.
Atlantis, Houston, press to Meco.
Roger, press to Meco.
Guidance officer reports navigation in excellent shape, and main engine cutoff projected at 8 minutes 31 seconds. Velocity 15,500 feet per second, altitude 56 nautical miles, downrange distance 389 nautical miles.
Coming up on throttling down of the main engines to maintain 3 Gs.
20 seconds away from main engine cutoff.
We have Meco, Houston, 25, 9, 70, and up at 400.
Roger Brewster.
Commander Brewster Shaw confirming main engine cutoff.
Ascent nominal. This is a direct insertion, uh, launch. ET separation confirmed.
Orbital parameters at, uh, main engine cutoff, uh, after ET sep, 189 nautical miles by 34 nautical miles. There will be, uh, an Omes burn to adjust the orbit at approximately 119 nautical miles circular.
Fred, you got anything to say?
Atlantis, Houston, uh, you know, you guys are doing great so far.
Okay, just checking.
Things have gone very smoothly, uh, so far in the, uh, ascent phase. The orbiter is move maneuvered to uh burn attitude for the, uh, ignition of the, uh, Omes engines, adding 278 feet per second velocity to the, uh, speed of Atlantis and boosting it into its 119 nautical mile circular orbit.
Atlantis, Houston, about a minute and a half L-O-S Teeterus. We will see you at Yugarti at 51 past the hour. Your burn looks great to us.
Okay, Yugarti at 51 and, uh, looks like we're in a safe orbit from here.
We concur, Brewster.
First, uh, payload activity, uh, due to occur at about 7 and 1/2 hours or so into the flight with the deployment of the Morelos satellite.
This is mission control, Houston.

Atlantis, Houston, the customer advises that Morelos is go for deploy.
Understand Morelos go for deploy. Thank you, man.
This is mission control. The sunshield is open, and the PAM-D has begun its mechanical sequencing.
Atlantis, Houston, we're 2 minutes till L-O-S. We'll talk to you post-deploy at Guam, 7 plus 34.
Okay, we'll see you there.
Payloads has just confirmed that, uh, the Morelos has been deployed.
Okay, we got a good, uh, deploy off for ya.
Atlantis, Houston, we're 30 seconds to L-O-S. Hawaii is next at 746, and the customer would like you to verify that the deploy was on time.
Uh, yes, Sally, the deploy was on time, and we'll see you there.
Okay, thanks a lot.

This is mission control. We have had, uh, confirmation from payloads that the PAM-Perigee kick motor did fire on time.
Atlantis, Houston.
Go ahead.
A ground station at Fucino, Italy, has acquired Morelos. They acquired them in exactly the right place, and they've received good spacecraft data. So that's a confirmation of good PKM.
And the Morelos people would like to offer their congratulations to the crew, and thank you for a job real well done.
Okay, it was our pleasure.

Good morning, Atlantis. Houston here with you through Canberra for 5 minutes.
Good afternoon, Houston.
And congratulations to the first Air Force CDR of the 35 new guys.
Roger that.
And great job on the deploy yesterday. It looks like another good day for a deploy today. Hope you're looking forward to it.
You bet.
This is mission control. The main work today for the crew will be the deployment of the AUSSAT satellite.
And that's scheduled to happen at 1 day 0 hours and 51 minutes.
AUSSAT is the, uh, second in a system of three satellites that will be operated by Australia's National Satellite Company.
The first one was launched from, uh, the space shuttle on the 51-I mission in August of 1985.
The payloads officer confirms that all the PAM data looks good.
The guidance navigation and control officer confirms that Atlantis is in the proper deploy attitude for the AUSSAT deployment.
The sunshield is full open.
The AUSSAT is spinning at 50 RPM.
Atlantis, Houston, you're a go for deploy.
Thanks, Jim. Understand go for deploy.
Payloads officer confirms deployment of the AUSSAT satellite and that it looks good.
Houston, Atlantis, uh, looks like we got a good deploy. Felt like it may have gone uh, a second earlier or so, but you'll have to let us know about that one.
Okay, we copied all that. It looks like a lot of people on both sides of the world will be happy, and good job, you guys and girl do good work.
Thanks, Jim.
And congratulations. It looks like, uh, AUSSAT was just acquired by Alan Park and it was in the right place at the right time. Good job.
Super. That's great. Thanks.

Good morning, Atlantis. Houston here with you through Canberra for 5 minutes.
Good afternoon, Houston.
And congratulations to the first Air Force CDR of the 35 new guys.
Roger that.
And great job on the deploy yesterday. It looks like another good day for a deploy today. Hope you're looking forward to it.
You bet.
This is mission control. The main work today for the crew will be the deployment of the AUSSAT satellite.
And that's scheduled to happen at 1 day 0 hours and 51 minutes.
AUSSAT is the, uh, second in a system of three satellites that will be operated by Australia's National Satellite Company.
The first one was launched from, uh, the space shuttle on the 51-I mission in August of 1985.
The payloads officer confirms that all the PAM data looks good.
The guidance navigation and control officer confirms that Atlantis is in the proper deploy attitude for the AUSSAT deployment.
The sunshield is full open.
The AUSSAT is spinning at 50 RPM.
Atlantis, Houston, you're a go for deploy.
Thanks, Jim. Understand go for deploy.
Payloads officer confirms deployment of the AUSSAT satellite and that it looks good.
Houston, Atlantis, uh, looks like we got a good deploy. Felt like it may have gone uh, a second earlier or so, but you'll have to let us know about that one.
Okay, we copied all that. It looks like a lot of people on both sides of the world will be happy, and good job, you guys and girl do good work.
Thanks, Jim.
And congratulations. It looks like, uh, AUSSAT was just acquired by Alan Park and it was in the right place at the right time. Good job.
Super. That's great. Thanks.

Good morning, Atlantis, and Happy Thanksgiving from all of us down here in Houston.
Good morning, Houston. Thanks for that great music.
Okay, the commander's wife called and left this message.
It says, "Your families on Earth wish their loved ones aboard Atlantis a Happy Thanksgiving."
And that's all the messages we have right now.
Okay, thank you. I think this is one of the, uh, best Thanksgivings that all of us from 61-B have spent, and we hope the same is true for all of you down there, including all of our loved ones and friends.
Well, we'll second that.

The, uh, SATCOM K2 satellite was being put into orbit, uh, by the PAM-D2, a new booster, flown for the first time on this mission and used for the first time with this satellite.
The PAM-D2 is capable of launching as much as 1400 pounds weight more than the, uh, regular PAM.
Everything is looking good.
And Houston, Atlantis, all three batteries are reading 30 decimal 4.
Great, thanks, Jerry.
Atlantis is at the proper deploy attitude.
Atlantis, Houston, with what we can see at this time, you're a go for deploy. Everything looks good.
Roger, Jim. Thank you. We concur.
And we're LOS in 2 minutes. Teeterus next at 2132.
Okay, we'll meet you there with the report.
This is mission control, we're AOS, Teeterus, and the payloads officer confirms from telemetry that the PAM has been deployed.
Atlantis, Houston, with you, Teeterus now.
Loud and clear, Jim.
Deploy was on time, and I got the numbers for you.
And sounds good. Congratulations on the very first PAM-D2 deploy.
Roger, thank you. It all looked exactly nominal.
Good job.
We could tell it was a little bit bigger when it went out. There was a bigger boom.
Roger, the SATCOM ops folks would like to pass all, pass along their congratulations for a job well done.
Okay, give them my thanks. And you're absolutely right, Jerry and Woody did a great job.
Three for three, that sounds good. Now we can look forward to some groundbreaking activities with your new construction techniques tomorrow.
You got it.
PKM burn is expected at about 4:45 PM Central time.
Jason, Atlantis, we've uh, seen ignition.
Sounds good.
Look like a nominal burn.
Okay, sounds good and we understand the array aircraft was able to track the uh, telemetry before the burn, then also Huntington Beach reports uh, good PAM-D2 burn. They saw good uh, chamber pressures.
Okay, great, that's good news.

Atlantis, Houston, with you through Hawaii for 9 minutes.
Loud and clear, Sally.
How was your turkey?
It was really good, what there was of it.
We're just getting ours ready.
I think I ate too much. And how's your turkey?
Uh, they're all real busy downstairs.
Well, that sounds promising.
And Atlantis, Houston, we're getting TV from the middeck.
Looks like the turkey's coming out of the oven.
I just hope you've got cranberry sauce to go with all that.
As a matter of fact.
Funny, I should ask.
Their Thanksgiving dinner will be chicken consommé, smoked turkey, the vegetable is corn, green beans, and pasta. They'll have cranberry sauce, butter cookies, and lemonade.
This looks better than the dinner I had just a few hours ago.
How about you have a better cook than uh, what you had with Steve?
I don't think I'd better comment on that. I certainly didn't have as many cooks.
Sally, I guess you know that uh, President Reagan declared this week National Family Week, and as we're sitting up here enjoying uh, Thanksgiving turkey dinner, we'd like to pass down and make sure that, uh, all our families know we're thinking about them, and that uh, we look forward to getting back with them as soon as we're done with our work up here.
And that goes for Bryan and Jerry, and Mary, and Woody, and Charlie, and Rodolfo, and myself, and we'd like you to pass that along to our families if you would.
I'll sure do that, Brewster, and I'm sure that they know that uh, you're thinking about them, and I know that they're thinking about you too.
Okay, thanks.

Uh, this was a problem at the Dakar ground station, and I'd like to uh, I'd like to read to you from the, the Twix that came to us from Dakar to GC here in the Moker, um, explaining the, explaining the problem.
Uh, the Twix reads, "At AOS minus 4 minutes, the station experienced a momentary power fluctuation causing the computer to halt. The cause of the fluctuation was found to be an 18-inch monitor type lizard across several phases of the load bank. The lizard was dislodged with a screwdriver and scampered away."
This is still quoting from the Twix.
This is Thanksgiving, and not April 1st, right?
I'm not sure I could finish this.
It's hard to be a straight guy.
Oh, Brian should know.
The lizard was last seen moving at a rapid pace across the plains of Senegal, and that's the end of the Twix.
I guess that's, uh, that picture, that smoke trail we saw going across on our last pass.
Probably was.
It probably was. We had several comments in the room here that that it was really smoking along.

Atlantis Houston, good morning. We're with you through TDRSS.

This is Mission Control. The crew wake-up music was a Marine Corps hymn in honor of uh crew pilot,
Brian O'Connor, a member of the United States Marine Corps.
And uh thanks that great music this morning. You've never seen anything until you've seen a Marine try to stand at attention from a dead sleep in a sleeping bag in 0G.
The crew is all ready to begin their EVA preparations.
And uh what do you and Jerry have a good time out there and to Jerry especially uh Pinky and I and Ox and Bob and Bruce and all the people that you've worked on EVAs in the past wish you all the best on this one.

Well, thank you. Woody and I are really looking forward to having the same kind of adventures that you guys have all had.

David Leestma, the EVA CapCom. He'll be on CapCom duties uh just during both EVA periods this flight.
Leestma was an EVA crewman on mission 41G in October of 1984.
On the first EVA of the EASE Access experiment here on flight day four.
The crewman will uh begin the experiment by assembling and disassembling the access experiment.
Primary objective of the access experiment is to test the structural assembly concept uh for the suitability of this assembly process to larger frameworks such as space station structures.

Atlantis Houston, with you through Canberra for five minutes.
Okay, David, we've got the first bay just about complete.

Okay, that sounds good. Looks like you're already ahead of your timeline.
Okay, Houston, the first bay was two minutes 30 seconds.
Pretty quick way to make a buck.
Yeah, it's working nice.
Atlantis Houston, 30 seconds to LOS Canberra. We'll see you at Hawaii at 2202.
They'll touch the last tray to build a couple bays.
You guys are looking first class.

Hey, use the skates.
Space station's one too?
Kondo, right.
Ross and Spring reported having completed two of the 10 bays at the access structure.
They uh commented on the ease of uh of assembling the uh assembly structure, which is the rotating uh fixture, assembly fixture that they are constructing the bays on.
They build each one and then slide it up on the assembly fixture.
They will then disassemble it.
The first five bays are built by uh EV 1 Jerry Ross, and then they change positions in the uh two manipulator foot restraints, and Sherwood Spring will build the sixth through 10 bays.
Atlantis Houston, with you through Hawaii for about three and a half minutes.

And both uh Jerry and Woody are building uh bay 9 of access, and uh they'll be raising that probably in the next minute or so.

Okay, we're getting good downlink TV at this time and those guys out there look great.
Feel great.
And it's better to look great than to feel great.
That's what you said two days ago.
That was one of mine.
Okay, Brian, and Bruce, get ready to raise nine.
Go ahead.
Ready, up, two.
That's hard to tell, but it looks like it uh moves about half a foot or so back and forth with a a period of about uh one to two seconds.
And you gave it a pretty good hoist.
Okay, Brewster.
Last struts coming out.
Spring and Ross had completed nine bays of the access structure. They are well ahead of the timeline.
Oh, I got her.
Okay, let's bring it down.
All right, all right.
Come on down.
22 minutes ahead of the timeline right now.
Some reason I saw them out is easy.
I know.
Now the upper side, how do the top ones work?
You guys are doing great. Just continue to be careful, that uh the way that thing shakes up there, I'd hate to have to chase anything down.
Okay.
It's not coming down as easy as it went up, I think.
These uh these gloves really have a good grip.
Yeah, I'm delighted.
Used to help with the shock to the sidewall and push it. Okay, I'm moving around for you.
Never done that in the water before, there's something different.
It's uh yeah, it's different. I'm not sure why.
Okay.
So, the door just slid right off. I have to get behind him and wedge with your mouth.
Yeah, pop my little, yeah.
This is working out pretty slick though, Jerry.
This is pretty good.
Okay, this is where we uh first open the hinges.
I seem to be popping that one off pretty well.
Yeah, it's coming okay.
All right. I'm over. Okay.
Okay, which way were you rotating the stove here?
Can't wait to go to the next numbers.
Here is all, too.

Hands are off, well pretty good so far.
Yeah. Out of here, we're next to the last space here.
Now we're moving along.
You guys look almost look like you know what you're doing out there.
I hope so.
Did you notice any binding uh when you locked down the last couple bays? Yeah.
Maybe attributable to sun.
I noticed binding, whether it's attributable to sun or not. It almost seems like the uh the rail likes to grab in the position it is, and you got to break it loose. Once you break it loose, it slides fine.
They uh those static friction.
Right, yes.
It seemed to be a little bit stiffer to bring them down than to pull them up, if anything.
I see.
Okay, the next step is to stow access hardware. All the pip-pins seem to be working nice for you. Everything looks like it can be.
Everything working real nice. Got your note canister bucked up. Yes, sir.
That too completes. That's all she wrote.
Okay, that's a total of 1 hour and 25 minutes.
Very thing, huh?
Ah.
Get paid for this, huh?
Yeah, yeah.
Sure am glad we spent all that time in the water tank working our hands out though.
Yeah.
Really can't tell a whole lot of difference, Brian, from the tank.
It feels just all the same, the valves are much smaller than what they were back there.
Would you give me a mark when you do the first actual ease access?

Atlantis Houston, we're about two minutes to LOS TDRSS. We'll see you next at Hawaii at 2337.
Okay, good day, see you there.

This is Mission Control at Mission elapsed time 2 days 23 hours 29 minutes.
The crew is uh roughly 45 minutes ahead of the timeline and has completed the uh their first task assignment for access and has already begun their assemblies of the uh ease structure, which is an inverted tetrahedron.

They will uh assemble and disassemble this structure six times in a row and follow that by storing it.
Atlantis Houston with you through Hawaii and then TDRSS and we're getting a spectacular uh picture of Woody right now on the top of EASE.
Roger, that's a lot clearer.
Okay.
You're clear to start the third one.
I knew you were going to say that. That feels good to do some good hard work.
Yeah.
EVA flight control officer reports that the two EVA crewmen are ahead on the timeline by about one hour.
Mission specialist Woody Spring at the top of the uh tetrahedron, uh working on assembly number three of the EASE structure.
Complete.
Not that complete, Brian.
Yeah, and you're clear to start a disassembly. Ready, sir?
Got it. Right here.
Please.
Coming down.
Five holes.
Okay, Brian.
Okay, if you guys want to just uh hold on for a minute, we got to change the uh 16mm magazines. My hands could use a break too. That's a lot rough on the fingers. In fact, my left hand is getting numb. So Okay.
Fingertips are numbing more than the thumb, and I don't know why, that's the first time for that.
Okay, this will be the uh fourth assembly and then we'll switch places. Roger that.
Roger that, Woody says.
I'll tell you this is as well as any of our water runs we've ever gone.
Right? Right?
Times are probably fairly comparable.
How long we've been out, Brian?
2 hours 51 minutes.
Wow.
So yeah, I'm about rechecking your procedure to, just Jerry. 57.
I've been uh stoking pretty good, Brian, so I probably have some Okay.
And Atlantis Houston, uh we'll confirm that the metabolic rate of the low man has been quite a bit higher on this uh task than the high man.
I completely.
Woody's got a harder task, I think, overall.
He's floating there, but the bottom guy handles a lot more hardware.
He's working harder I suspect.
Okay guys, let's uh when you after you've get rested here, we'll crank up again with Woody low and Jerry high, and we'll go through the nominal two and then we'll see how everybody's doing and evaluate whether we want to continue with uh anymore with uh Jerry high and Woody low.
Okay.
You said we have pretty good flexibility here.
Getting better, I think, as we've worked on them.
Well, how we start the build?
Okay.
Ready? Yes, sir.
Okay, Brian, here we go.
Okay, box count.
Oh, moon's down there. Sun's coming up.
Thanks for on the griddle.
I must say it sounds like the Dickie and Dimsy song to me.
Got it?
Well, that one's got me, go ahead.

Atlantis Houston, Brewster, we're about two and a half minutes to LOS TDRSS. We'll see you at Guam next at 101.
And after cycle 6, it's your evaluation whether you want them to continue or not.
Okay, thanks.

This is Mission Control, Houston. At the beginning of the EASE experiment, the cycles were taking 20 minutes as opposed to 30 minutes as planned. They were using 12 minutes for build and 9 minutes for stow.
At the end of cycle 4, the EASE experiment was taking 14 and a half minutes for the complete cycle. 9 minutes for build and 5.5 minutes for stow.
This indicates a learning curve for the EASE experiment, and the crew is continuing to pick up extra time ahead of the timeline.
Jerry's up on top on the sixth disassembly and then Jerry uh So, Joe'll do two more uh assembly and disassemblies and it should be left to it.
Yeah, that sounds good. Starting to hit the learning curve.

Atlantis Houston, for 30 seconds to LOS Guam. We'll look for you at Hawaii at 114. And uh we copy that you're going to go for about two more cycles.
That's confirm, Dave, we'll see you there.
Atlantis Houston with you through Hawaii and then TDRSS.
Roger there, Dave. Boy, I was coming off a running turn.
Right, you're I think you're right. At the same time you you risk it bad.
I did much better on my second one than I did on my first one and then I started doing down hill again.
Okay, pretty good.
All right, then.
Okay, take it down.
But he's so funny at all, is he?
Brian's hunger is up and he can't have it to we get in there.
This will be the end of the 7th complete cycle. They plan to do one more after this.
How's the change doing, Brian?
Doing well with 20 to 30 minutes before each assembly and disassembly.
Actually, feel my hands now, Jerry.
Yeah.
Yeah, I think eight's enough.
Ah, that one was nice.
Nice and controlled.
Yeah, occasionally you get one like that. Okay, what did I do right?
Yeah, I know.
There you go.
I got it.
There you go, Brian.
Coming down.
Good work. Bring it down.
Hey Woody.
That one felt good. Good.
Apparently you're reaching it.
Last time, Brian.
Okay.
That last one was also 18 minutes.
Hey.
I feel like I've been working. That one felt good to me.

This is Mission Control, Houston. Uh the astronauts have just completed their eighth assembly and disassembly of the EASE experiment.
The last four assemblies and disassemblies took a little longer than the first four but that was to be expected with the crew members a little tired on the second floor.
But they said that they did observe a learning curve.
My hands are uh sweaty.
Rest of my body feels fine.
All right, then continuing in that vein. My hands are sweaty. I don't know I still I I feel slightly damp up and down the legs and back.

In Atlantis Houston, these access uh folks want to say that they've gotten confirmed data from you guys and the TV also is pretty great.
Fact, I think uh that the heart rates here on the uh customer support room on the PIs was probably a lot higher than your guys throughout the entire task.
You guys did super.
Thanks, baby. Thank you, David.
It all worked as advertised.
That's true. There weren't any real surprises at all.
The uh learning curve on uh EASE was pretty dramatic.
Okay, your your total EV time was uh 5:32.
Okay.
Keep walking up.

This is Mission Control, we're now counting down to uh deployment of the OEX DAP target.
This evening they will be station keeping for about 30 minutes uh with the target uh at about 35 feet from the orbiter.
Okay, Toss, it seems like at Holds attitude.
In uh If you stay flatted in Normal jet, it holds attitude better in the OEX DAP.
And the OEX DAP uh seems to perform pretty well.
It's easy to hold attitude or uh position very very tightly with it.
And uh it's holding attitude at the same time very well.
So, overall, I'd say it's it's uh really performing quite well.
It's telling, it also seems like it has uh less cross coupling than the main line DAP.

Okay, thanks.
This is Mission Control, Houston. The advanced autopilot system is a test that's on the orbiter and uh in the future, some of this software may be incorporated into the orbiter flight software.
The new advanced autopilot uh works a little better than the old autopilot system did.
Some of the things that they're doing is measuring how well it maintains position, how many RCS jet firings it takes to maintain that position and how much fuel

is being consumed while they're doing it.

We are interested in any comments that you might have had on the on the EVA and in particular how um how tired your hands got during the process.

They're tired, we wouldn't uh like to go outside again tomorrow.

Yeah, that uh that goes for both of us. Fact, when we came in, I didn't have a whole bunch of finger strength left.

That's what it sounded like to us. Did you have any other comments on the task?

No, overall, I think they uh went pretty much as we expected them to, and in fact, there really weren't very many surprises from all the work that we had done in the water tank.

The hardware, the fight hardware uh was in super shape and everything looked very nicely.

Well, it sounds like uh we can look forward to a good uh second EVA, too.

We hope so.

And Jerry, um just to pass on something from from uh EVA Capcom Dave, he noted that uh you had an EVA of 5 hours 30 plus 2 minutes.

5 hours 30 plus 2 minutes?

That's right.

And we also uh noted that, just for your information, the access took about an hour and 10 minutes, EASE took about 3 hours.

And we uh added that up and we're going to go back and check the recorders for an 18 minute gap.

We do have a trivia question for you.

Okay, we're ready.

Oh, I don't think you are.

Well, probably not, but try it anyhow.

Okay, first of all, this was uh this was brought to you by uh the EVA position.

And the question is, what do the following things have in common?

Death by hanging, melting 200 pounds of bronze in a foundry furnace, a snake consuming a chicken egg, four times its head's diameter, the attention span of elementary school children, and Jerry Ross assembling EASE.

Hold on, let me put that out in a second.

Okay.

I'm sorry, your time's up.

The answer is they all take 20 minutes.

For about 30 seconds to AOS, we'll pick you up in TDRS in about 4 minutes, and you'll probably be pleased to hear that we don't have anything else for you.

I think you're right.

Dr. Neri, habla Miguel de la Madrid.

En mi nombre y en el de todos los mexicanos, le envío a usted un saludo muy afectuoso.

Estamos muy orgullosos de la forma en que usted ha desempeñado esta histórica misión del primer mexicano en el espacio.

Compartiendo y ensayando conocimientos científicos que serán de vital importancia para nuestro propio desarrollo y en favor del pueblo de México.

¿Cómo está usted? ¿Cómo le está yendo en lo personal? ¿Cómo se siente?

Muy bien, señor Presidente.

Es para mí un gran honor poder saludarlo desde el orbitador Atlantis de la NASA y, a través de usted, deseo enviarle un cariñoso saludo a todo el pueblo de México.

Dado que, gracias al esfuerzo de cada uno de mis compatriotas, en este momento México está representado alrededor de nuestro maravilloso planeta.

He tenido la oportunidad de poder contemplar, en especial, la belleza de México desde la península de Baja California hasta Yucatán y Quintana Roo y, durante el transcurso de la misión que está por terminar en un par de días, he realizado una serie de experimentos muy interesantes que fueron planeados, concebidos por científicos de nuestro país y espero que los resultados obtenidos sirvan mejorar el avance tecnológico de México y, en especial, motivar a nuestra maravillosa juventud que, considero yo, debe ser el pilar para el desarrollo de un México cada vez más próspero y mejor.

Dr. Neri, estoy seguro que su misión va a tener esos resultados.

Usted es un exponente de la juventud de México, preparado, patriota, compitiendo con personas que han tenido entrenamientos muy duros y usted ha salido muy bien librado.

Por eso le vuelvo a decir que yo en lo personal y estoy seguro que todos los mexicanos estamos muy orgullosos de usted.

Le quiero preguntar qué experimenta Muchas gracias, señor Presidente. He de decirle que me encuentro muy bien, que estoy muy contento. Esta es una experiencia realmente única, maravillosa. Es lo mejor que he tenido y posiblemente que será lo mejor que tenga yo de mi existencia.

Dr., eh, ¿qué tal el experimento de la germinación de la planta esta de alegría o amaranto, como se le llama? ¿Ya lo ya lo hizo usted o o lo o está pendiente?

Es un experimento que dura varios días, fue iniciado hace tres días y he estado observando la forma en la cual germinan las semillas de amaranto, desde luego, así como de lenteja y de trigo. En dos días más concluirá el experimento y traeré a de regreso a Tierra, fotografías del desarrollo que ha habido en el proceso de germinación de cada uno de estos tipos de semillas.

Dr. Neri, y el experimento de la electropuntura para medir la situación de estrés o de nervios, ya se realizó, en su caso, ¿usted qué qué aprecia?

Ese experimento lo he iniciado y he tenido algunas lecturas esperadas. No sé todavía si, en efecto, eh, me ha ayudado a sentirme mejor, pero me siento yo muy bien a bordo y al igual que mis demás compañeros, ya todos estamos ambientados, aclimatados. El primer día fue muy difícil para todos nosotros, pero ahora estamos acostumbrados a este medio ambiente y yo, en lo particular, me siento muy bien de salud y estoy realizando el experimento de electropuntura con el mayor detalle y precisión posible.

Pues muy bien, Dr. Eh, le deseo que todo siga tan bien como va hasta ahora, un feliz regreso, aquí los mexicanos estaremos muy pendientes de su regreso, lo estaremos esperando con un gran cariño fraternal de compatriotas y estoy seguro que este viaje va a ser un paso adelante en el desarrollo tecnológico y científico de México.

Muchas gracias, señor Presidente y nuevamente le reitero a usted un respetuoso saludo y un abrazo cariñoso a todo el pueblo de México.

Dr. Neri, eh, me despido de usted, le pido que envíe De mi parte, un cordial saludo al comandante Show y a la tripulación ah de la nave y que tenga usted un muy feliz regreso.

Con todo gusto lo haré, muchas gracias y hasta luego.

And we got a couple of fit choppers up here uh what do you say we get this thing started?

Sounds good, Booster, we're all with you.

Okay, we're going to suit them up and get them out.

The first chore is to build the access after they build the first nine bays.

Ross will uh put his feet into the manipulator foot restraint on the end of the mechanical arm.

Then he will be moved to the top of the structure where he will complete building the last bay from the top.

Mary's doing a good job driving me around. Ready to go up, Mary.

Go ahead.

Okay, that's good, Mary. Stop.

Break's on.

Okay, complete.

Ready to come down to the cable run?

Yes, ma'am.

After Ross completes building this 10th section from the top, he and Woody Spring together will uh install a dummy electrical cable to simulate stringing a cable through a length of a truss as you might do in building a space station structure.

Good job, aren't you?

Uh the rope won't go in sit in the hole that the rope is supposed to go in.

They check everything else, I know.

Don't fail.

Okay, Mary, I'm ready to go up.

Going up, we're in Bernie, we're going slow.

Okay, great. Okay, good stop uh there.

Okay, that's nine bays, I guess.

Looks good.

I could have been a little bit neater was it, but it's there.

Okay, Mary, I'm ready to start down.

Okay.

You were shaking that whole thing. I can see now why they didn't want us to be climbing up that yankin on it too hard.

This is mission control. The next task will be for Ross to remove the entire access truss from the assembly fixture and to move it around to various positions.

How's it feel?

Right now, it feels very easy, but I don't have any rates on it.

Coming with the arm moving it, it's it's I can do whatever I want to right now.

There's a little force required to to start or stop the motion.

About how many weighs what? A couple of hundred pounds?

Yeah, I think so.

These are to be different.

That'll be a little bit more interesting.

We just put the brakes on, Jerry. You look good there.

Okay.

One more go to that note and then you're in the center.

Okay.

There you go. You got it.

I have essentially almost no finger pressure on it right now.

All right, I'm going to try to stop the rate.

Oh. Right on the mid.

Didn't take much force either.

All right.

Let me try a little bit faster, Rate, you think I'm going to clear down there?

Oh, you're clear.

Okay, I'm going to stop this.

Okay, not too bad.

Transfusions are extremely easy.

That one's not quite as nice. You can't rotate the plane that easily.

Get force in other axes. Still controllable, so long as keep the rate down.

Okay.

Let me go out to the end.

That's right, point it right at the moon.

All right, you certainly tell you got more there.

It still feels manageable. It's harder to get a pitch.

I would imagine so.

Okay, I'm just about ready to bring it down.

I think you'll like it, Woody.

Looking forward to it, Jerry.

Okay, you're up to, Woody.

Okay, Jerry, let's see how precise you can be with this thing.

One more.

Aloha, my friend.

On Mary.

Yeehaw.

That was not bad at all, sports fans. Let's go build a space station. Nice job here.

Atlantis, Houston, 1 minute to AOS, TDRS, see you at Hawaii at 2300.

Hey, Dave, see you there.

This is Mission Control. As we went AOS, Ross and Spring were trading places, uh, the crew was about 17 minutes behind on the EVA timeline.

Atlantis, Houston, with you through Hawaii and then TDRS.

Hi, David. Woody is completed the tear down of a bay, the maintenance demonstration and he is rebuilding the 10th bay.

No, we're complete, Mary.

That's what time it is, what is What time is it?

That's if you the way the whole thing. I agree with you, Jerry, the slow rate, this is a piece of cake.

It's got a rate, and I don't think anything to get away from you.

Yup.

I think it's got so many nice handles.

It's you always kind of have a pretty decent grip to stop almost any motion, I think.

I can I can move this and stop it wherever I wish to.

Me too. How's that, here? It's fine. You got it.

Translation, there's no problem.

Long structure.

Stop, I'll send now. Stop lower enough. Now just swing it out over the right wing. Go, girl.

Nice, nice, nice.

That's too close, Woody.

Slow down.

Okay.

I'm ready to put it down anyway, Jerry.

Okay.

Okay, the clocking is pretty good. Bring it on down and over towards me a little.

Okay, good. I'll get it.

Okay, nice, that's nice job, guys.

Okay, it's nice, Woody.

All right, it's for the ride, Mary.

My pleasure. What do you go.

I do get that move a little bit fast at one point.

What I got is, I got translations and rotations in the way.

Now let's take it down, we're in uh we're in the EVA line, Mary. Okay.

Well, I'm pretty impressed with the design.

Yeah, I mean going, it's pretty good. I think you've demonstrated today that this wasn't a good thing to build off of an MFR.

Oh, it was optimized to be done from a fixed base.

MFR does a pretty nice job though. That's pretty precise, yeah.

Mary did a real nice job doing this for our roll on the go.

Two inches up or two inches over?

Yeah.

But I just start setting up EASE, I think.

Okay.

Atlantis, Houston, 2 minutes to AOS, TDRS, we'll see you next at Guam at 0024.

As we went AOS, Woody Spring had just maneuvered himself into the manipulator foot restraint, and he is now proceeding to build a heat pipe by connecting two section of two sections of the EASE structure. The elapsed time on the EVA is currently 4 hours and 10 minutes.

Atlantis, Houston, with you through Guam for 7 minutes.

Oh, David, we just completed the heat pipe with Woody and getting ready to start the build.

Okay, we copy.

That's no problem at all, moving knows right now.

No, it didn't look like it would be.

That worked from right here, if you let me.

He's stopped.

Okay, Mary, we're complete here.

Nice job. Let's complete on the build.

Atlantis, Houston, 30 seconds to AOS, Guam, we'll see you at Hawaii at 37.

Okay, Houston.

The next step will be for Spring to manipulate EASE from the manipulator foot restraint in order to test the usefulness of the arm in supporting this type of construction.

Atlantis, Houston, with you through Hawaii and TDRS.

I'm through it.

That thing is started and it's really tight.

That's the thermal stress because that thing's worth as much as they could be at.

What can I say, more man.

Now we got a hammer and the port TSA, how about the uh the end effector on your senior list stage is pretty massive.

Yeah, I don't want to hammer up massive equipment if I can help it.

Well, then why don't you take the uh

Why don't you take that end cluster, the very end cluster, and put it to the next one and we'll just reassemble it back on that one.
Throw that one off.
Have a make shift? Yeah, we'll have to take that one inside or something.
Yeah.
Okay David, I took the fourth, the spare cluster.
Put it next to the base cluster, and we have the structure reattached at that point.
Okay, we copy that.
Richard, I guess what I propose, as long as the ground on any problems is, we do the same task with this node.
But we have plans.
Yeah, let's press on.
Okay.
We're just going to have to be real careful with the structure.
But what are you thinking, swap out MFRs, and then manipulate these?
Okay, do you want to start with the app cluster?
Yeah, I would like to do the manipulate, if everybody agrees with that, and then we'll do the teardown, and then I'll do the e-bike. Are you ready?
Yeah.
Okay, let's start working with it, just a tiny bit.
Okay, you got her.
Okay, Mary, take me where you want to take me.
Launch right off.
Nice and smooth, Mary.
This range, it's nice and easy to hold position.
It's not that bad.
By applying any force, I need to hold on to it.
Pre-charge.
Okay, at that kind of a rate, it took like 15 degrees of rotation to to stop it.
That's pretty.
Hey, you're starting to stop it.
It says about 35 degrees or so, and that was purely by squeezing on the two places I'm holding, just like uh brakes.
Atlantis, Houston, based on what we've heard from Jerry and Woody, uh we concur with bringing the uh base cluster back inside at the conclusion of the CVA, and not messing with hitting it anymore.
Okay, Dave, I think that's probably wise decision.
Make it easier to figure out what's wrong with it.
I think it's just tight tolerances in a little bit of galling.
structure like this, you get rates and uh other different actions than what you intend sometimes.
Yeah.
You got to take out the the main one first and then damp out any residuals.
That's what I did not do with Access.
I think the roll is pretty good, and it doesn't take much to stop it at all.
No.
Not out of fixed footing here.
Okay, ready to bring it down?
Sure.
Here we go.
Okay, Mary, now put me into the disassemble.
Configuration.
But I can tell you if we hadn't had the problems with the base cluster, this would be an easy day to do business.
Okay, I am forced to hold this one, and you just for the uh e-pipe, right?
Yeah.
Get ready to move each here.
Let's take the other riser down first.
Okay.
And Mary, I guess you can move me over to the uh the heat pipe.
Okay, Woody, we are ready to release.
Make sure that's good and secure, Jerry.
Yes, sure it is.
Can you get some decent motion on that?
Yeah, I think so.
Just so it's so wiggly. I'm trying to point right at the moon right now, and if, you know, the the moon moves, these solid yellow and just kind of wiggles back and forth.
Atlantis, Houston.
We're about uh four minutes to LOS, Tedris.
We've been having some dropouts, so I'd gave you the call now.
We'll see at Guam at 200.
Okay, Dave.
As we went LOS, they were beginning to take the heat pipe apart instead of that.
Uh EVA reported that they're about 15 minutes behind in timeline.
Atlantis, Houston, with you through Guam for eight minutes.
We're just finishing up the tailgate thing now, Dave.
Okay, that sounds good.
Okay, works like a champ.
Hey, what do you think? You got a high ease, huh?
I know I got it. I just gotta hate to win.
I know.
Okay, coming in.
Gotta, had to close and lock.
So the 1% power, time to go home.
Okay, it is closed and I'm about ready to lock it.
It is locked.
You guys do good work, and Ace Construction company might be in business in a few years.
Certainly hope so.
This is Mission Control, Houston.
Official EVA time was 6 hours 41 minutes.
Today's EAS access experiments went very well.
All of the objectives were accomplished.
The access took a total time of 3 hours 11 minutes.
The planned time had been 2 hours 45 minutes.
Total time for EAS was 1 hour 56 minutes, and the planned time was 1 hour 45 minutes.
We'll begin our press conference with questions from Mexican journalist.
Muchisimas gracias por el saludo y desde luego que transferiré este al resto de la tripulación.
Me siento muy fascinado, realmente sorprendido, es imposible describir lo que he visto desde este orbitador.
La tierra se ve simplemente maravillosa, es como un sueño.
I'm going to translate these for the rest of the crew to know what the question was and what the answer was, well.
This lady is uh from the Mexican radio, and she would like to greet you all, and she asked me how I spell about uh looking at the earth and the rest of the universe from the orbiter.
First of all, commander Shaw, we want to thank you for allowing us this interview and uh also we uh want to congratulate all the crew for this successful mission over.
Dan, gracias.
Charlie Duke, KHO-U TV, for Charlie Walker.
Charlie, we have not heard or seen a whole lot of you during the flight.
Can you give us a a layman's assessment, please, of how your experiments have been going and how how soon we might now see some results from them?
Well, the uh C-Plus work has been going well.
I have gotten uh all of the uh primary sample processed, the indications are here that uh we're going to have some good results. But uh, of course, all the major laboratory assessments of the final material has to be done on the ground after the mission.
Uh I I just have to say that uh we will see uh after the flight how things uh have turned out.
I think we're making tremendous progress and uh we're soon going to be ready to uh to go into the pharmaceutical manufacturing business, uh using space as a major resource.
With that, we're going to have to go to uh larger systems and a cargo bay of the shuttle.
We're going to have to uh eventually go to a space station, uh with systems in the cargo bay of the shuttle, we should be able to make material.
Given FDA food and drug administration approval, they can be on the markets in 1988.
But to uh to really make uh uh this process worthwhile and to really benefit humanity, as a total, it's going to take just this facility that we've just been talking about, the space station.
And uh, I might just say that the what you see here on board the shuttle today and what we are working with, and have been working with the last couple of days, is a microcosm of the future.
That is, we've been working with technologies to build a much larger facility that will utilize in production form a lot of the technology, electrophoresis, and materials processing work, the 3M has been doing here on board the shuttle, that Mary's been working with.
Those factories will use the space station, and this is just a very small early step in that direction, but here we are working on a lot of these elements all in one seven-day flight.
Were you able to use the Linhof camera to get photographs of Ethiopia or Somalia?
Yes, we took some uh pictures last night of that area.
The uh it was relatively cloud-free, and we took uh with two or three different types of cameras a whole string of photographs uh during a pass over that whole area.
Carlos Barys Houston Chronicle, for Mary Cleave.
Mary, could you describe your work with the RMS, and were you moving the arm in the fast mode, or in the slow mode over?
Yesterday when we started out, I had the arm in vernier slow mode, but we were on a faster payload ID for the MFR, it was a faster rate than we've ever worked uh that system before.
And um then we went up to the coarser rates and that seemed to work fine also.
Tom Mau from the Los Angeles Times, to Jerry and Woody.
Did you find it easier to build the access and e-structures from the end of the remote manipulator arm, then it was floating free in space, and were you as tired after the end of yesterday's activities as you were Friday, over?
I'll take your last question first.
Uh, I was much less tired yesterday than I was Friday.
Uh, it's a lot easier to build the e-structure off the manipulator foot restraint.
However, the access was originally designed to be work from a fixed foot restraint, so it uh it worked very well, uh as it was originally designed.
That was more a proof of concept to see if we couldn't in fact work 45 feet off the uh bay with at the end of the arm, and we showed that we could do that.
Yeah, I think the attempt at trying to build a bay at the end of Access was more of a demonstration of trying to add a piece of hardware to an existing space structure.
As far as how tired I was, I was uh my hands were quite tired after the first EVA, and I I think uh the medics will tell me when I get back down that I'd put in a pretty good day's work.
My hands were not as tired after the second one, but I was still uh pretty well beat, I I put in a pretty good day's work there also.
Uh I guess what I'd say was that Access provided us a nice work station to work from, and the assembly task even though it was hand-intensive was a very simple task to do.
EAS for the man on the bottom was uh fairly labor intensive because he handled every part himself, while the man on the top had a lesser work level.
His hands got uh tired fairly fast because he had to do all the work using just his wrists to torque things around.
Atlantis, that uh concludes our press conference. We thank you very much for your time.
Good morning.
You bet. We were at least six of us.
The entry team is now in charge of the flight. We will be landing at Edwards runway 22, deorbiting on orbit 108.
Atlantis Houston.
You are go for deorbit burn.
Okay, understand, go for the burn.
This is Mission Control. The propulsion systems officer confirms a good burn.
Atlantis Houston, you had a great burn.
We'll lose you in two minutes. We'll see you at Yargody at 11:00 past at LOS Configure LOS.
Roger that Fred, look good from here.
This is Mission Control. We'll be acquiring uh the orbiter again in five minutes through Yargody.
Atlantis, with you through Yargody.
Okay.
Well, we're down.
Atlantis Houston, uh we'll lose you at Yargody in about 30 seconds. We will see you post-blackout about 51.
51. Okay, we'll be there, Fred.
This is Mission Control. We've lost voice communication with the orbiter Atlantis. We will acquire them at uh 3:20 p.m., about 13 minutes before landing, following the period of S-band blackout.
Atlantis Houston, configure AOS.
Loud and clear Fred. Nice smooth ride so far.
Atlantis Houston, energy ground track nominal, Nav is go.
Okay, Fred, thanks.
This is Mission Control. We see Atlantis at a velocity of 10,000 feet per second, elevation 164,000 feet, sync rate 163 feet per second, range 357 miles from Edwards.
Atlantis Houston, take Tackands.
Roger taking Tackands.
Velocity now 6900 feet per second, elevation 138,000 feet, range 214 miles. We are go on runway 22.
Transfer state vector to the backup, please.
Roger and work, Fred.
Atlantis approaching the coast crossing, be passing over California, just south of Ventura.
Atlantis Houston, take air data.
This is Mission Control, velocity now 3100 feet per second, elevation 90,000 feet, range 75 miles. 7 minutes to touchdown.
Atlantis Houston, surface winds 030 at 5.
Roger 030 at 5.
Flight Dynamics officer confirms that Atlantis looks good turning on the heading alignment circle. Elevation now 23,000 feet, velocity 580 feet per second.
Atlantis Houston, on glide slope on center line, surface winds 030 at 5.
Roger Houston.
Elevation now 9,000 feet.
Gear down.
Main gear touchdown.
Nose gear touchdown.
And Atlantis comes home from her second mission in space, bringing home a crew of seven, from the first construction mission in space.
We'll stop on Atlantis, Houston.
Welcome home, Atlantis, great landing.

