Okay, uh, CDR, Pilot, uh, is the launch director. Is calling me, John? Yeah, I'm sure it's George.
Yeah, I have a message here for both of you from the President. I'm going to read it.
You go forward this morning in a daring enterprise, and you take the hopes and prayers of all Americans with you. You go in the hand of God and draw on the courage of life. Our countryman and poet, William Cullen Bryant once said, America is where mankind throws off its last feather.
With your exploits, we move them one one more. Who, he said, shall place a limit to the giant's strength or curb his swiftness in the forward race. Through you today, we all feel as giants once again. Once again, we feel the surge of pride that comes from knowing we are the first and we are the best and we are so because we are free.
For all Americans, Nancy and I thank you and the thousands of others who have worked to make this day possible. As you hurdle from earth in a craft unlike any other ever constructed, you will do so in a fleet of American technology and American will.
May God bless you and may God bring you safely home to earth again. That's the end of the message. And John, we can't do more from the launch team than say we sure wish you an awful lot of luck, we're with you 1000% and we're awful proud of being a part of it. Good luck, sir.
Yeah, thank you and uh you're absolutely professional. But the serious. Uh the mighty fine to beat.

The liquid hydrogen vent valve has been closed and flight pressurization is underway. T-minus 1 minute 50 seconds and counting.

Chuck Cannon has just said, "Smooth sailing, baby," to astronauts John Young and Bob Crippen.
T-minus 1 minute 35 seconds and counting.

T-minus 1 minute 20 seconds and counting. We can see the purges of the main engines uh as we prepare for ignition.
T-minus 1 minute 10 seconds and counting.

Liquid hydrogen tank is at flight pressure.
T-minus 1 minute mark and counting.

The firing system for the sound suppression water will be armed uh in just a couple seconds from now.

It has been armed.
T-minus 45 seconds and counting.

T-minus 40 seconds and counting. The development flight instrumentation recorders are on. T-minus 35 seconds. We're just a few seconds away from switching to the redundant cent sequencer.
T-minus 27 seconds.
We've gone for redundant set sequencer start. T-minus 20 seconds and counting.

T-minus 15 14 13
T-minus 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 We've gone for main engine start. We have main engine start.
We have and we are lift off on America's first space shuttle and the shuttle has cleared the tower.

434, back to Cuba.
Roger.
Columbia, Houston, you're go at throttle up.
Roger, go at throttle up.

Roger, Columbia, on the nice ride. You're lofting a little bit, it'll probably be slightly high at staging.
One minute 45 seconds coming up on go, no go.
Columbia, your negative seats.
So, that call up says that uh Columbia is the altitude is too high for ejection seat use?
Roger, your go for SRB sep.
2 minutes 4 seconds, standing by for SRB sep confirmation.

Roger, on the sep, Columbia.
Mark uh 2 minutes 20 seconds, confirmed solid rocket booster sep.
Roger, go with that, Miko.
Mark uh 2 minutes 30 seconds, on go on-board guidance is converging on its program. Columbia is now steering for its precise window in space for main engine cutoff.
Mark 2 minutes 40 seconds, Columbia now 39 nautical miles in altitude, uh 42 nautical miles downrange.
Mark uh 2 minutes 50 seconds, Columbia. Columbia, you're looking a little hot. All your calls will be a little early.
Okay.
Columbia now has two engine roll capability.

Mark uh 3 minutes.
Young and Crippen really moving out now. Velocity now reading 6200 feet per second.
Mark uh 3 minutes 15 seconds, Columbia now 51 nautical miles in altitude, 66 nautical miles downrange. Velocity now reading 6500 feet per second.
Mark uh 3 minutes 30 seconds, Columbia now 55 nautical miles in altitude, 78 nautical miles downrange.
Mark uh 3 minutes 40 seconds, standing by for a return status check in mission control by flight director Neil Hutchinson.
Columbia giving the green to continue.
Mark 3 minutes 55 seconds, standing by for press to Miko, which suggests Columbia should lose one engine. Now press to Miko.
Roger press to Miko.

Columbia continues flying forward, coming up on negative return.
Roger, press to Miko.

Mark 4 minutes 8
Columbia, standby for negative return.
Mark, negative return and your ramp is good.
Mark 4 minutes 25 5 seconds, and counting. With that call up from Capcom.

Capcom Bradenstein. Columbia now committed to space travel, Young and Crippen can no longer turn around and return to the launch site.
Columbia, Houston, we're showing both ohms PC transducers off scale high.
Mark 4 minutes 45 seconds. The uh flash evaporator is activated on-board to cool Columbia.
Columbia, you're setting off scale low here.
Roger, standby, we'll keep an eye on it.
Mark 4 minutes 56 seconds, Columbia is lofting early in the second stage, is now being taken out of the trajectory as programmed. Columbia now 74 nautical miles in altitude, 181 nautical miles downrange.
That's nominal variant, man. What a view. What a view.
Roger, enjoying it.
Mark 5 minutes 15 seconds, Columbia now 75 nautical miles in altitude, uh 202 nautical miles downrange. Velocity now reading 11,000 feet per second.
Uh, a status check in mission control by flight director Neil Hutchinson.
Columbia, Houston, you're go at 5:30 Miko 8 plus 34.
Mark 5 minutes 40 seconds, that call up from Capcom Bradenstein says that Columbia's trajectory navigation and engine performance look good.
Roger, Columbia, reading you loud and clear.
Okay, you're clear, a little weak.
Mark 5 minutes 55 seconds.
Columbia, we just switched over Bermuda voice. You should be getting better here in a second.
Roger that. Thank you, I'll touch to you.
6 minutes, Columbia is now 76 nautical miles in altitude, 280 nautical miles downrange. Velocity now reading 13,000 feet per second.
Columbia, Houston, uh could we have the cryo heaters, please?
And, Columbia, your single engine Rota.
Roger.
Mark 6 minutes 25 seconds.
Okay, thanks for the cryo heaters.
That call up from Capcom Bradenstein says that if a two-engine failure occurred, Columbia is capable of an emergency landing at Rota Naval Air Station, Spain.
Mark 6 minutes 40 seconds. Columbia pitching over now, diving to increase velocity, decrease altitude, giving Columbia her most favorable attitude. Columbia now 72 nautical miles in altitude, 373 nautical miles downrange. Velocity now reading uh 16,400 feet per second.
Standing by for single engine Press to Miko call up from Capcom Bradenstein.
Columbia, your single engine Press for Miko.
Mark 7 minutes 20 seconds. That report says that Young and Crippen can achieve orbital insertion even if two engines go out.
Mark 7 minutes 30 seconds. Columbia 67 nautical miles in altitude, 485 nautical miles downrange. G-force is building for Young and Crippen now up to 3 Gs.
Mark 7 minutes 45 seconds.
Columbia's main engines slowly being throttled back now. Should be throttled at 65% at 6 seconds before main engine cutoff. Status check in the control center.
Columbia, Houston, you're go at 8.
Mark 8 minutes 4 seconds. Looking good.
Columbia, now 63 nautical miles in altitude, 606 nautical miles downrange.
Mark 8 minutes 15 seconds, Columbia now 63 nautical miles in altitude, 650 nautical miles downrange. Standing by now for main engine cutoff.
0.6025670 up at 223 feet per second.
Roger, Columbia, Miko.
Confirmed shutdown. Columbia, the gem of this new ocean, now in space, not yet in orbit. Now standing by now for external tank separation.
Copy that, setup.
Roger, we confirmed the sep, Columbia.
9 minutes 3 seconds, confirm external tank separation.
Columbia now performing an evasive maneuver, moving below and beyond and translating to the north of the external tank. Young should see it moving away out of his window.
9 minutes 40 seconds, Go/No Go status check and mission control for the first Oms burn.
Governor, go.
Columbia, Houston, you're go for Nominal Oms 1 and for APU shutdown on time.
Roger that.
Mark 9 minutes 55 seconds.
Columbia now maneuvering to its Oms 1 burn attitude.
Using the 2 6,000 lb thrust engines, the Oms 1 will be post-grade, moving Columbia forward and higher on her flight path, placing Columbia in orbit.
Standing by for ignition, 10 minutes 22 seconds.
Columbia 67 nautical miles in altitude, 1160 nautical miles downrange.
All right, we got 102 on the left and 101 on the right. T.C.
Roger, Columbia, they're looking good to us.
A status check in the control center.
Columbia, Houston, we have 40 seconds to LOS, configure LOS. You're looking good burn over the hill. We'll see you in Madrid.
We have 40 seconds to go. We're in the 97 by 42 right now.
Roger.

You can tell when these uh when these big clusters fire up here on the on the nose, but uh they don't really you don't hear them, they just kind of shake the vehicle. You can see some stuff going out of the ones going to the sun firing.

And uh Cripp, I've got to remind you, configure AOS.
Uh that my don't we done that just about time I called you up. You should be in good configuration this time.

Roger.

And Columbia, we don't have any S-band yet, we're talking UHF.
Okay. We read you loud and clear. That UHF certainly sounds good.

Yeah, it sure does.

Right on, you have changed any. It's real soft mouse. I tell you, John didn't tell me about it for three years, but ain't no way you can describe it.

Hard to get my head in the cockpit here and do my procedures.
I can imagine.

Okay. Uh what camera are y'all looking at right now, uh do you know?

Roger, we're looking at out the forward camera.
Okay, we uh we want to show y'all Pod here. We do have a uh a few tile missing off of uh of both of them. Uh off of the uh Starbird pod uh that got basically what look appears to be three uh tile and some smaller pieces and off the Port pod, uh looks like, I see one the full square and uh looks like a few little triangular shapes that are missing and uh we're uh kind of put that on TV right now.

Roger, Cripp. We can see that good.

And Columbia, Houston, now we have a state vector coming your way.
Did it tell that.

Okay, the red light has are coming loose.
Roger.

Okay, and they're released. About 24 seconds.
Roger.

Uh, from what we can see, both wings uh tops and uh leading edges oh there's uh the all those are fully intact.

Okay and the red are coming out.
Roger.

That uh report from John Young showing a few of the missing tiles uh also he reported the Columbia, we're 30 seconds uh from LOS, we'll see you at the io at the indie at the two plus 12.

Okay, and we'll see you there.
And the radiators look good.

That's deployed right on time.

Young also reported that the uh tiles on the wing appeared the wings appeared to be intact.

This is shuttle control Houston at uh one hour 56 minutes mission elapsed time. Uh we've had loss of signal with Madrid, the uh next station to acquire will be Indian Ocean Station in about 15 minutes. This is shuttle control Houston at one hour 56 minutes mission elapsed time.

Uh this is Shuttle Control Houston at uh two hours uh mission elapsed time. Uh we're out of station contact now uh with Columbia. Uh meanwhile, uh JSC's engineering and the development director uh, Max Faget, was in the uh, or is in the uh, Control Center and uh watched the uh uh television transmission of the missing tiles. Uh, he reports uh that uh these are not critical tiles. Uh, these tiles that are missing, represent no hazard to the vehicle or the crew. Uh, Dr. uh Faget uh, further states that the worst that can happen is that after landing a small patch of skin underneath the tiles may have to be replaced. We're at the two hours or one one minute mission elapsed time. This is Shuttle Control Houston.

Mission Control Houston. Status check in Mission Control now, go no go to stay on orbit.

Given a go to stay on orbit, and uh Columbia Houston, you guys did so good, we're going to let you stay up there for a couple of days, you're go for on orbit.

Spacecraft let's go for on orbit. This thing is just performing just outstanding.

Roger, we agree with that. And uh one reminder that uh to remove from the ascent checklist the post-landing pages for your entry checklist uh before you deposit it.
Okay, we'll uh we'll we'll play the on ahead, fine.

That was John Young reporting on the performance of uh Spacecraft Columbia. We're at three hours 16 minutes mission elapsed time and the uh crew aboard Columbia has been given a go to uh stay on orbit. Uh this uh provides them with the opportunity to uh doff their suits.

And uh continue with orbital operations.

We have about uh four minutes remaining. And Columbia Houston, just for your information, uh you dropped those SRBs right on target and uh they were floating just the way they ought to be and the boats are getting ready to fish them and bring them back.
Okay.

They uh ride that they gave us was uh pretty neat. It was uh the the vibration was a little higher frequency and there was a and there was a place in the middle there where it shook a little uh the frequency, but it was all very low and you can read the instruments and do all that kind of stuff.

That's good to know, we won't have to make the print on the Q-cards any bigger then.
Yeah, that's right. And uh you know, it was a sharp a sharper vibration than what we've been experiencing in the simulator but it was uh very uh very moderate.
Roger, Columbia.

And we're ready for the TV anytime.

Okay, Hank, I'm coming at you with a flight deck camera. I got a picture of John up here in the uh CDR seat. And uh you might tell me how your reception is.
Okay, we've got a good picture, Cripp.

Okay, that's the TV uh status report. Uh the flight so far has gone uh uh smooth as it could possibly go. We've uh done uh every uh test that we're supposed to do and we're up on the timeline and the vehicle has just been performing uh performing beautifully. Much better than anyone ever expected uh to do on a first flight and uh no systems are out of shape uh just an example. We did uh three uh star tracker alignments in uh less time than it takes to do one star tracker alignment the mission simulator. And all the RCS jets have been fired and the vehicle is just performing like a champ. Really beautiful. And uh it's delightful up here in zero gravity, my dad. Of course, we owe this to a lot of people. There's uh one in particular I'd like to pay uh my respects to who, if he was here now, would uh really be having a lot of fun. And he was a man for the country and many like you, and I guess y'all all know him. And uh of course there's many other people we could pay our respects to if we started down the line of all the folks we owe, we'd be here all day. But uh we certainly want to thank everyone who has helped to get this thing everyone and and they take great pride in it doing so well right now.

Okay, John. Sure, we appreciate those comments.
Now, I got to switch to the back now and uh Cripp is going to tell you how things went in the back of the ship.

And Cripp, for your info, your mother and Jenny and the girls are all in the viewing room watching.
No migration.

Okay, we're switching over to uh to the aft camera here now are showing the aft deck. Uh how does that picture look to you?

Coming in real good.
Okay, Hank. Yeah, I'd like to echo John's words as I usually do. I guess uh being the so-called rookie on this flight, I had a a thrill from from the moment of liftoff all the way up to what we're doing now. It has really been super. The spacecraft has worked as advertised all the way along uh a few little minor unique problems, but uh nothing of significance. I guess the major one you guys are working on down there is dealing with some of our instrumentation. Uh but uh I think we've got something that's really going to mean something to the country and the world. This vehicle is uh performing like a champ like all of us that have worked so long on, knew knew that you would. I guess then uh acknowledging people that uh have done a lot for the program, I think it's only right that we mention a couple of guys that gave their lives a a few weeks ago in our countdown demonstration test, John Bjornstad and Forrest Cole. They uh they believed in the space program, it meant a lot to them and I'm sure they'd be thrilled to see where uh where we have the vehicle now. We uh we head it off to those guys. But it's been fun. We think the rest of the mission is and looking forward uh landing in Edwards a couple days from now. And unless you got some questions, Hank, I guess that does it.

That was a good time, and I think you must have practiced, but just about to lose your ghost song.

Mission Control Houston, data indicates that the crew is up and working and uh plans are for coming here to uh transmit some uh wake up music.
They and liftoff. She's beautiful. She's to the plan. You copy Houston? This is Houston, you copy.
Well, many, many hours went into this thing, a job well done by the Shuttle Space Team. We can't say that she's sleek and lean, but I'll tell you right now, she's a mean machine. The Columbia. Not the kind you smoke. This here's a bird. She gets high on herself. Rockwell, Martin, USB I, all got together and they give it a try. You ought to see that sucker fly. There she goes, now way, bye-bye.

Two solid boosters hanging off the side. Look out boys, you're in for a ride. She's going to switch into overdrive, just lay back and let her slide. Don't hit any fence post on the way up there, boys. Flip them switches. All right.

Cripp and Young are in the driver's seat with tons of thrust sitting at their feet. Home sweet home never sounded so sweet, after this ride they're going to be beat. Shook their socks off. Best to the rattle of teeth too. Hold on boys, all right.

Now that we've got them into outer space, there's anticipation on every face. Thousands of eyes looking all around, just to see where she's going to touch the ground.

Morning Columbia, welcome to day two.
All right.

Morning Gents, how's the silver team this morning?
Well, we're just fine and had a grand night, things are looking good. And uh we have do have a question. We're wondering uh you guys shivering up there? Is the temperature pretty good?

Well, it uh certainly got a little bit chilly last night. Was about ready to break out the long undies. If you guys have got a way to warm up the cabin a little bit, we'd probably be interested in hearing about it.

Columbia, if you look down, uh you'll uh see uh Cape Kennedy, perhaps. There's tremendous launch from there yesterday, which you may not have seen.
Oh, we saw it.
Well, let's see. We're coming over to, oh, there we go. I got the runway in the VID in fact.

Very good. It's exactly 24 hours ago. You've been there for one day now.

John and Cripp, we have a telephone call coming into the Space Network from the White House for the crew members of the Space Shuttle Columbia. We would like to uh uh to patch them through. If you would please, Mr. Vice President, go ahead.
Could you hold on just a second for the Vice President, please.
Absolutely.
Hello.
Oh, Mr. Vice President. Hey, who's that, John? Yes, sir. How are you doing? Oh, we're just talking on the flight there. Hey, listen, I'm glad to talk to both you and Cripp. How's he behaving? Oh, yeah, he is working well. I'm trying to behave pretty well, Mr. Vice President. Well, listen, it's a far away from when we were doing our running down there in the cape, but I certainly want to congratulate you. I've just come from seeing the President and over here in his quarters and he asked me to convey uh his warm regards and we are proud, not just of you all, but of all the people that are supporting your fantastic mission. Oh, that's really worth working for. How's it going up there? Everything rocking along all right? Space ship is just space ship is just the flaming deer plate.

Well it's great and everybody views it I'm sure just as the forerunner of great things to come. I mean, it's one of the, it's one of the I think your trip is just going to uh ignite the excitement and the forward thinking from this country, so I really just wanted to call up and wish you the very best.
We certainly appreciate it, Mr. White. Thank you very much, sir.
The only thing wrong is I don't get to, don't get to see in Houston, Texas, I don't think, because I don't think they're going to let me come down there and I had planned to be there when you got back on Sunday.
Well, we're counting to see you, Mr. Wright.
Well, we want you up here. I can guarantee you that, and congratulations on what you're doing. How is Crip's heartbeat doing?
Slow down to about 40, I think.
Oh really?
Well, it's what I I couldn't understand that. I guess I thought he was a calm guy out there, you know, and now look at him.
Right, right.
It's great talking to you and I'll let you go back to work. What's the next thing you've got to do?
Well, we have some more flight plan, uh RCS jet test, a rough flight.
And we're going to also find out that, uh if we can dawn our suits that we're going to use for entry and snap in the seats without any problem.
Oh, that's great. I'm sure it'll go well. Sitting right behind my desk is that model you gave me down there and also the picture of you two guys, and it was it was there before this phone call, too.
Well, we appreciate it. All right, back to work, but it's great talking to you and best of luck. We'll be watching that re-entry in the landing with great interest on behalf of the whole country, I'll tell you. Everybody will be.
Thanks. Thank you very much, sir.
So long, Bob. So long, John. Good talking to you. Best of luck.

Okay. Well, we'll get to talk to you there, but uh we had some dinner music for you. We thought that you would be eating dinner at this time. It's uh courtesy of contra-band and I think it's uh appropriate to the pace that you kept today. If you'd like to hear that as you go over the hill.
Oh, we'd like it, it's the pre-dinner music. We're almost there.
Okay. Well, we'll let it come your way.

That's it for the contraband.
All right.

Good morning, boys. Oh, John.
Creepy.
Time to wake up. It's time to get up for the big splash down today, and both of you can use a shower.
Relax.
Smells like Young's been into the instant breakfast drink again.
Yeah.
Hey, this is Jim Bob, Jim Bob, speaking, guys.
And this is the new Katie, Creepy Rifles, with the new Katie marching band, and they're forming a giant hooking horns on the field.

After five missions you ought to have this down by now.
Hey, be nice to him. He's 50 years old.
All right, you!
You are too!
Hoist!
Crip and get out of the rack. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. Let him sleep. If he wakes he'll just spill the coffee all over the controls again.
Hey guys, it's Vice President Bush on the phone for you again. Crap, get your helmet off the control stick. Pick up pizza number 22.

And so that arrogant, crib, and you waited 12 years for this. If you don't wake up, you're going to miss the whole darn mission. Hey, Young, here's a rambling Rick from Georgia Tech.
Hey, wake up you guys. Get it up. Come on, you better get to the. Come on, get to work. You guys got 300 government agencies to support up there. Come on!
Good morning, Columbia. This is Houston and we have a real-time 42 for you.
A real-time back there?
Uh, that's affirmative. Uh, real-time 42 and that last wake-up song. We'd like you to the scratch-out splash down and insert touchdown.
Oh, okay. We appreciate that.
Now, hear this. Now, hear this.
Revally, revally, up all idlers, clean sweep down fore and aft. That means Crip.
John runs a tight ship.
It sure sounds that way.
How's the silver team doing this morning?
We're doing just great and uh, how are you doing?
Okie dokie, thanks for helping us out with that little ATU cooling problem last night. I was so asleep in the middle of that, I couldn't think. I came back here and swore through uh, switch 2 and got one instead.
Roger.
John and Crip, we're 30 seconds from LOS. Want to report that Columbia is in super shape. Almost no write-ups. We want her back in the hangar, and you have a preliminary go for the burn.
Oh, go, go. And we concur, flying like a champ.
There is a boss over here we say.
This is mission control.
Bermuda has loss of signal.
Next station will be Ascension Island in uh, about 8 and 1/2 minutes.
Columbia has been given a clean bill of health and a preliminary go for the deorbit maneuver.
The final go for that burn uh will come uh over either Ascension or Botswana.
That we're 31 minutes 54 seconds away from that maneuver at this time.
It will be performed over the Indian Ocean, out of range of any tracking stations.
We'll get a report on that burn at uh Yargadee.
We're 8 minutes away from Ascension acquisition at 2 days, 4 hours, 50 minutes mission elapsed time. This is Mission Control, Houston.
Columbia, the solutions onboard look very good to us and you can start to maneuver to burn attitude whenever it's convenient.
Okay.
Columbia maneuvering to burn attitude now.
Columbia, your burn attitude looks good to us. Everything onboard looks good to us. You are go for deorbit burn and uh we'll go LOS in 30 seconds here. We'll talk to you Botswana in 5 minutes. Over.
Okay. I understand both of the deorbit burns. Thank you now.
That's the best there's we've had in 2 and 1/2 days and we've had some mighty good news in those 2 and 1/2 days.
Talking to you watching.
That looking good. I wonder whether you were including the crew.
They're exceptions to every rule.
You got it.
We report the crew looks terrific.
Yeah, that's what he's lately.
This is mission control, 2 days 5 hours 27 minutes elapsed time.
Columbia is about 50 seconds away from acquisition through the tracking station at Yargadee, Australia.
Here in a control center, the backup crew for this mission, Astronauts Joe Engle and Dick Truly are uh behind the Capcoms.
We'll get a uh report at Yargadee on how the deorbit maneuver went.
Should have acquisition in about uh 10 seconds. We'll standby.
Columbia, this is Houston, through Yargadee. We're standby.
Burn was on time and now is is 1/10.
APU.
3 stars fine, also. We got 2 or 3 running now.
Okay John, we copied uh the shortest of all burn reports and uh Crip, we understand you have two of three APU's running now.
Yeah, all right. You're cutting out there a little bit, but you understood correct.
Roger, thank you.
This is mission control. That that is nominal at this time to have two of the three APUs running. The third APU is powered up at entry interface minus 5 minutes. We're now at entry interface minus 19 minutes 22 seconds.
This is mission control. Chase planes are taking off now at Edwards.
Sure, look quiet down there, Joe.
We're just enjoying the view.
We'll be with you for 2 minutes, and uh you'll like to know that four chase aircraft have just launched from Eddie and coming up looking for you.
For check six.
Now, we ought to be there in about 45 minutes.
That's what they're hoping, and we're sure of it. And we're with you for a minute and a half longer.
Joe, the the review of the space with black was good canyon.
It is really black.
All right, Roger, you've convinced us.
Yeah, but you're so easy.
Is my great scientific observation that did the to you.
Now you're bragging.
You never heard of Texan do that.
Certainly not from Porter, Texas, Crip, and we're 30 seconds from LOS.
Okie dokie.
See you when it about uh uh it looks like about 5, 6 minutes from now.
We agree with that. See you shortly.
Mark 2 minutes to the time we should be able to talk to the crew aboard Columbia.
Chase, this is Houston. You can anticipate getting a Mach 9 call, over.
Roger, one copy is using them.
Houston out.
It's mission control. The Mach 9 call to Chase helped set up the phasing for his rendezvous with Columbia.
Chase, standby for the Mach 9 9,700 ft per second call.
This one.
AOS, in automatic flight control.
Two C-Band radar contacts showing an altitude of 165,000 feet, range to go 410 nautical miles.
Standby for Mark on 9,700 feet per second.
Hello, Houston, Columbia's here.
Hello Columbia, Houston's here. How do you read?
Line clear and we're done uh Mach 10.3 and 180 AS.
And we couldn't agree more, John. Your state vector is good. We've got good data in-house.
Okay. All our telemetry like the ALV data is nominal.
All right, the information on that APU quantum is looking good.
Mark Mach 9 at 9,700 feet per second.
Columbia, you got perfect energy, perfect ground track.
Roger that.
Columbia now nine times the speed of sound.
Light the dynamic oscillation.
And John, we're showing you rolling right. Looking good.
I'm rolling.
Rolling now.
Chase will

in time.

Okay.

Altitude 152,000 ft, range 311 miles, speed Mach 8.8.

Roll reversal complete.

Columbia, we show you out of 151k now, 8.4 Mach looking good.

Roger that and I got a solid back and locks on standard.

Roger that we're looking.

All three APUs hanging in there looking good.

Roger that we control.

We have a live television picture from the Columbia tracker of Anderson Peek.

Crossing the coastline now.

We will show you crossing the coast now.

Roger that, we control.

141,000 feet.

Range 241 miles.
Columbia, we like attack hand go ahead and take them.

Okay. Going.

So you are now incorporating tac Air navigation system data into the spacecraft.

Mach 7.

135,000 feet range 221 miles.

Columbia, we like the tone with her quiet to us.

Looks quiet in here, too.

What a way to come to California.

Columbia, you are out of 130k now on the tracking, 6.4 Mach looking good.

Roger that.

We agree with those numbers.

And Columbia, your NAV state with TacAir is perfect.

Mach 6, 124,000 feet.

Range 177 miles.

And John, we're seeing near zero aileron trim.

Uh, we seen two tests.

Yeah, less than that now.

Roger that out of 119k, 5.5 Mach.

Off flight controls looking good.

Rogers we copy.

Hydrogen purge in progress.

Roger that out of 112k, 4.8 Mach.

Range 130.

John Young rolling using manual control now.

We see Dell as 21°.

Roger that.

Mach 4.4, 107,000 feet.

Range 112.

Columbia, we see roll reversal complete. Control looks good.

Roll's coming out.

And you are starting to get ammonia cooling now.

Roger we can clear.

And Columbia, you are out of 100k with positive seats, looking good.

Ejection seats can be used now.

It's beautiful.

Below 100,000.

Mach 3.

Keep probes out. And, our data looks pretty good from here.

Roger that, looking good. We're looking at them and you're coming right down the chute.

Rudder active now looking good.

Range 73 miles.

Columbia, we're go for air data. You're out of 89k, 2.8 Mach.

Roger that, we're looking.

Okay, taking clear.

Roll reversal to the right.

Columbia, we see you coming right, looking good.

Okay, I'm getting back and seeing the talk back from those landing here. I don't look Okay, dear.

Okay, grip. They all look good to us.

Roger that.

We now have a live television picture from the long-range optics at Dryden.

Columbia, you're coming right down the track.

The tracking data, NAV data, and pre-planned trajectory are all one line on our plot boards here.

All right we can curve.

Out of 70,000 feet at Mach 1.8.

Range 42 miles.

Columbia, we show you very slightly high in altitude, coming down nicely, and the fes is to go to off.

Mach 1.3 at 58,000 feet.

Range 33 miles.

Out of 56k.

Looking good.

Mach 1 at 51,000 feet.

Range 28 miles.

Columbia, you're going subsonic now out of 50k, looking good.

Roger that.

Everything looking good.

Columbia, you're approaching the hack now, right on the money.

Roger that.

Columbia, you're getting ready to start the big sweeping turn into the runway.

Roger 2.

And, grip uh, the altimeter 3009.

Roger that.

38,000 feet.

Range 19 miles.

Columbia, you're coming right around the hack, looking beautiful.

Roger that.

Base coming aboard 30,000.

Roger 2.

Control, very smooth.

Columbia, you're really looking good. Right on the money. Right on the money.

And we're seeing 1.3 G's coming around the hack.

Roger that.

And, turning onto final your winds on the surface are calm.

Roger coming around.

25,000 feet.

Mach .6. Range 13 miles.

22,000 feet.

Control looking very smooth, speed bake, break at 40.

We have a television picture now.

You're right on the glide slope, Columbia.

Clear the area.

Right on glide slope.

Approaching center line, looking great.

This TV from the chase plane 16,000 feet.

15.

Airspeed 271 knots.

Fido says it couldn't be any better.

11,000 feet.

It's real good underneath.

9,000.

280 knots.

Looks real good.

5,290.

2500 feet.

You clear?

You're talking.

You're down.

50 feet.

40, 30, 20, 10, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, touchdown.

Nose gears, 10 feet.

5, 4, 3, touchdown.

Talk about, Skipper.

Columbia, Welcome home Columbia. Beautiful, beautiful.

I want to take it up from the hangar, Joe.

We're going to dust it off first.

Is the world's greatest all electric environment? You know, I'll tell you that. It was super.

Okay, convoy's on its way.

Convoy on one. We'll stop, Columbia. We'll stop.

This is mission control Houston. The unofficial touchdown time 2 days 6 hours 20 minutes 52 seconds.
2 days 6 hours 20 minutes 52 seconds.

And Columbia, Houston we are estimating at least 26 more minutes on the ammonia. You are looking real good.

And as Columbia's main gear touched the lake bed, the flight director's instructions were prepare for exhilaration.

It's always great to be back in big Houston.

Robert and I have spent the most exciting and interesting two and a half days probably that we ever spent in our lives or may ever spend again.

The spaceship Columbia is a phenomenon. It is an incredibly amazing piece of machinery.

Anytime you can take something that big and put it into space and bring it back and land it on a runway, you have just accomplished something just short of a miracle, I believe.

There are words to express there are words to express just how grateful we are to everybody that did so much to help this mission go successfully.

But there are a few people that need special thanks.

I thank, for example, my wife, Susie, put up with me for nine years.

While I was working on this contraption and the last three while we were trained for it, living, eating, breathing, and sleeping it, deserves a thanks.

And there is one person in particular that I'd like to thank.

It's Captain Robert Bob Crippen.

Now Bob is a very smart young man.

And he also works very hard.

And he kept me out of a lot of trouble on that flight.

He knows where I was.

When he wants to know the spacecraft, he knows it completely.

And there were some moments up there, and in route and coming from up there, where we had some very exciting places where we had to perform very complicated and complex tasks and Robert did all those things and uh, he did them without, and he did them with ignoring some potential personal risks, and I think he did one hell of a job.

And I'm going to recommend him to be a commander of one of the early Space Shuttle flights.

That's no joke.

And I think the American public is going to get their money's worth out of this baby.

Because, it will allow us to do in the 80s and 90s just the exact things that we must do for our defense and to advance science and technology.

The real cornerstones of what it's all about in this country.

We got the capability right now, and so I say to everybody here, let's just press on and do it.

For me to get a chance to fly with a guy like John Young and for him to come out with words like that, well, most of you have to know John, understand that, I was just hanging on hoping he'd point me in the right direction.

Most of you standing out here in front of me, have done what John and I have been doing for about the past nine years, we've been busting our buns to get the Space Shuttle up.

Well let me tell you, it was well worth the effort.

We've got one fantastic machine.

And we have given the country one marvelous technological capability.

For me, personally, it was a darnedest time I've ever had in my entire life.

And I'm glad to hear John's recommendation because I want to go back as soon as I can.

I would like John want to acknowledge my wife Jenny who put up with a heck of a lot to get me up there.

We certainly appreciate y'all coming out here today. Thank you.

